An astronaut or cosmonaut is a person trained by a human spaceflight program to command , pilot , or serve as a crew member of a spacecraft .
While generally reserved for professional space travelers , the terms are sometimes applied to anyone who travels into space , including scientists , politicians , journalists , and tourists .
Starting in the 1950s up until 2002 , astronauts were sponsored and trained exclusively by governments , either by the military or by civilian space agencies .
With the sub-orbital flight of the privately funded SpaceShipOne in 2004 , a new category of astronaut was created : the commercial astronaut .
The criteria for what constitutes human spaceflight vary .
The Fédération Aéronautique Internationale ( FAI ) Sporting Code for astronautics recognizes only flights that exceed an altitude of .
In the United States , professional , military , and commercial astronauts who travel above an altitude of are awarded astronaut wings .
, a total of 532 people from 36 countries have reached or more in altitude , of which 529 reached low Earth orbit or beyond .
Of these , 24 people have traveled beyond Low Earth orbit , to either lunar or trans-lunar orbit or to the surface of the moon ; three of the 24 did so twice : Jim Lovell , John Young and Eugene Cernan .
The three astronauts who have not reached low Earth orbit are spaceplane pilots Joe Walker , Mike Melvill , and Brian Binnie .
, under the U.S. definition 538 people qualify as having reached space , above altitude .
Of eight X-15 pilots who exceeded in altitude , only one exceeded 100 kilometers ( about 62 miles ) .
Space travelers have spent over 41,790 man-days ( 114.5 man-years ) in space , including over 100 astronaut-days of spacewalks .
As of 2008 , the man with the longest cumulative time in space is Sergei K. Krikalev , who has spent 803 days , 9 hours and 39 minutes , or 2.2 years , in space .
Peggy A. Whitson holds the record for the most time in space by a woman , 377 days .
In English-speaking nations , a professional space traveler is called an "astronaut " .
The term derives from the Greek words " ástron " ( ἄστρον ) , meaning " star" , and "nautes " ( ναύτης ) , meaning " sailor" .
The first known use of the term "astronaut " in the modern sense was by Neil R. Jones in his short story " The Death 's Head Meteor " in 1930 .
For example , in Percy Greg 's 1880 book " Across the Zodiac" , "astronaut " referred to a spacecraft .
In " Les Navigateurs de l'Infini " ( 1925 ) of J.-H.
The word may have been inspired by " aeronaut" , an older term for an air traveler first applied ( in 1784 ) to balloonists .
An early use in a non-fiction publication is Eric Frank Russell 's poem " The Astronaut " in the November 1934 " Bulletin of the British Interplanetary Society" .
The first known formal use of the term astronautics in the scientific community was the establishment of the annual International Astronautical Congress in 1950 and the subsequent founding of the International Astronautical Federation the following year .
NASA applies the term astronaut to any crew member aboard NASA spacecraft bound for Earth orbit or beyond .
NASA also uses the term as a title for those selected to join its Astronaut Corps .
The European Space Agency similarly uses the term astronaut for members of its Astronaut Corps .
By convention , an astronaut employed by the Russian Federal Space Agency ( or its Soviet predecessor ) is called a " cosmonaut " in English texts .
The word is an anglicisation of the Russian word "kosmonavt " ( ) , one who works in space outside the Earth 's atmosphere , a space traveler , which derives from the Greek words "kosmos " ( κόσμος ) , meaning "universe" , and "nautes " ( ναύτης ) , meaning " sailor" .
Other countries of the former Eastern Bloc use variations of the Russian word "kosmonavt" , such as the Polish "kosmonauta" .
The Soviet Air Force pilot Yuri Gagarin was the first cosmonaut—indeed the first person—in space .
Valentina Tereshkova , a Russian factory worker , was the first woman in space , as well as arguably the second civilian to make it there ( see below for a further discussion of civilians in space ) .
On March 14 , 1995 , Norman Thagard became the first American to ride to space on board a Russian launch vehicle , and thus became the first " American cosmonaut " .
Official English-language texts issued by the government of the People 's Republic of China use "astronaut " while texts in Russian use космонавт ( " cosmonaut " ) .
In official Chinese-language texts , "yǔ háng yuán " ( , " space navigating personnel" ) is used for astronauts and cosmonauts , and "háng tiān yuán " ( , " space navigating personnel" ) is used for Chinese astronauts .
The phrase " tài kōng rén " ( , " spaceman " ) is often used in Taiwan and Hong Kong .
The term "taikonaut " is used by some English-language news media organizations for professional space travelers from China .
The word has featured in the Longman and Oxford English dictionaries , the latter of which describes it as " a hybrid of the Chinese term "taikong " ( space ) and the Greek "naut " ( sailor ) " ; the term became more common in 2003 when China sent its first astronaut Yang Liwei into space aboard the " Shenzhou 5" spacecraft .
This is the term used by Xinhua News Agency in the English version of the Chinese " People 's Daily " since the advent of the Chinese space program .
The origin of the term is unclear ; as early as May 1998 , Chiew Lee Yih ( ) from Malaysia , used it in newsgroups .
With the rise of space tourism , NASA and the Russian Federal Space Agency agreed to use the term " spaceflight participant " to distinguish those space travelers from professional astronauts on missions coordinated by those two agencies .
While no nation other than the Russian Federation ( and previously the former Soviet Union ) , the United States , and China have launched a manned spacecraft , several other nations have sent people into space in cooperation with one of these countries .
Inspired partly by these missions , other synonyms for astronaut have entered occasional English usage .
For example , the term " spationaut " ( French spelling : " spationaute " ) is sometimes used to describe French space travelers , from the Latin word " spatium " for " space" , the Malay term "angkasawan " was used to describe participants in the Angkasawan program , and the Indian Space Research Organization hope to launch a spacecraft in 2018 that would carry "vyomanauts " , coined from the Sanskrit word for space .
The first human in space was Soviet Yuri Gagarin , who was launched on April 12 , 1961 aboard Vostok 1 and orbited around the Earth for 108 minutes .
The first woman in space was Soviet Valentina Tereshkova , who launched on June 16 , 1963 aboard Vostok 6 and orbited Earth for almost three days .
Alan Shepard became the first American and second person in space on May 5 , 1961 on a 15-minute sub-orbital flight .
The first American woman in space was Sally Ride , during Space Shuttle Challenger 's mission STS-7 , on June 18 , 1983 .
In 1992 Mae Jemison became the first African American woman to travel in space aboard STS-47 .
Cosmonaut Alexei Leonov was the first person to conduct an extra-vehicular activity ( EVA ) , ( commonly called a " spacewalk " ) , on March 18 , 1965 , on the Soviet Union 's Voskhod 2 mission .
This was followed two and a half months later by astronaut Ed White who made the first American EVA on NASA 's Gemini 4 mission .
The first manned mission to orbit the Moon , " Apollo 8" , included American William Anders who was born in Hong Kong , making him the first Asian-born astronaut in 1968 .
In April 1985 , Taylor Wang became the first ethnic Chinese person in space .
On 15 October 2003 , Yang Liwei became China 's first astronaut on the Shenzhou 5 spacecraft .
The Soviet Union , through its Intercosmos program , allowed people from other " socialist " ( i .e .
Warsaw Pact and other Soviet-allied ) countries to fly on its missions , with the notable exception of France participating in Soyuz TM-7.
An example is Czechoslovak Vladimír Remek , the first cosmonaut from a country other than the Soviet Union or the United States , who flew to space in 1978 on a Soyuz-U rocket .
On July 23 , 1980 , Pham Tuan of Vietnam became the first Asian in space when he flew aboard Soyuz 37 .
Also in 1980 , Cuban Arnaldo Tamayo Méndez became the first person of Hispanic and black African descent to fly in space , and in 1983 , Guion Bluford became the first African American to fly into space .
The first person born in Africa to fly in space was Patrick Baudry ( France ) , in 1985 .
In 1985 , Saudi Arabian Prince Sultan Bin Salman Bin AbdulAziz Al-Saud became the first Arab Muslim astronaut in space .
In 1988 , Abdul Ahad Mohmand became the first Afghan to reach space , spending nine days aboard the Mir space station .
With the larger number of seats available on the Space Shuttle , the U.S. began taking international astronauts .
In 1983 , Ulf Merbold of West Germany became the first non-US citizen to fly in a US spacecraft .
In 1984 , Marc Garneau became the first of 8 Canadian astronauts to fly in space ( through 2010 ) .
In 1985 , Rodolfo Neri Vela became the first Mexican-born person in space .
In 1991 , Helen Sharman became the first Briton to fly in space .
In 2002 , Mark Shuttleworth became the first citizen of an African country to fly in space , as a paying spaceflight participant .
In 2003 , Ilan Ramon became the first Israeli to fly in space , although he died during a re-entry accident .
The youngest person to fly in space is Gherman Titov , who was 25 years old when he flew Vostok 2. ( Titov was also the first person to suffer space sickness ) .
The oldest person who has flown in space is John Glenn , who was 77 when he flew on STS-95 .
The longest stay in space thus far has been 438 days , by Russian Valeri Polyakov.
As of 2006 , the most spaceflights by an individual astronaut is seven , a record held by both Jerry L. Ross and Franklin Chang-Diaz .
The farthest distance from Earth an astronaut has traveled was , when Jim Lovell , Jack Swigert , and Fred Haise went around the Moon during the Apollo 13 emergency .
Depending on the exact definition of 'civilian' , the first civilian in space was either Valentina Tereshkova aboard Vostok 6 ( she also became the first woman in space on that mission ) or Joseph Albert Walker on X-15 Flight 90 a month later .
Tereshkova was only honorarily inducted into the USSR 's Air Force , which had no female pilots whatsoever at that time .
Joe Walker had joined the US Army Air Force but was not a member during his flight .
The first people in space who had never been a member of any country 's armed forces were both Konstantin Feoktistov and Boris Yegorov aboard Voskhod 1 .
The first non-governmental space traveler was Byron K. Lichtenberg , a researcher from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who flew on STS-9 in 1983 .
In December 1990 , Toyohiro Akiyama became the first paying space traveler as a reporter for Tokyo Broadcasting System , a visit to Mir as part of an estimated $ 12 million ( USD ) deal with a Japanese TV station , although at the time , the term used to refer to Akiyama was " Research Cosmonaut " .
Akiyama suffered severe space sickness during his mission , which affected his productivity .
The first self-funded space tourist was Dennis Tito on board the Russian spacecraft Soyuz TM-3 on 28 April 2001 .
The first person to fly on an entirely privately funded mission was Mike Melvill , piloting SpaceShipOne flight 15P on a suborbital journey , although he was a test pilot employed by Scaled Composites and not an actual paying space tourist .
Seven others have paid to fly into space :
The first NASA astronauts were selected for training in 1959 .
Early in the space program , military jet test piloting and engineering training were often cited as prerequisites for selection as an astronaut at NASA , although neither John Glenn nor Scott Carpenter ( of the Mercury Seven ) had any university degree , in engineering or any other discipline at the time of their selection .
The earliest astronauts for both America and the USSR tended to be jet fighter pilots , and were often test pilots .
Once selected , NASA astronauts go through twenty months of training in a variety of areas , including training for extra-vehicular activity in a facility such as NASA 's Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory .
Astronauts-in-training may also experience short periods of weightlessness in aircraft called the "vomit comet" , the nickname given to a pair of modified KC-135s ( retired in 2000 and 2004 respectively , and replaced in 2005 with a C-9 ) which perform parabolic flights .
Astronauts are also required to accumulate a number of flight hours in high-performance jet aircraft .
This is mostly done in T-38 jet aircraft out of Ellington Field , due to its proximity to the Johnson Space Center .
Ellington Field is also where the Shuttle Training Aircraft is maintained and developed , although most flights of the aircraft are done out of Edwards Air Force Base .
Mission Specialist Educators , or "Educator Astronauts " , were first selected in 2004 , and as of 2007 , there are three NASA Educator astronauts : Joseph M. Acaba , Richard R. Arnold , and Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger .
Barbara Morgan , selected as back-up teacher to Christa McAuliffe in 1985 , is considered to be the first Educator astronaut by the media , but she trained as a mission specialist .
The Educator Astronaut program is a successor to the Teacher in Space program from the 1980s .
Astronauts are susceptible to a variety of health risks including decompression sickness , barotrauma , immunodeficiencies , loss of bone and muscle , loss of eyesight , orthostatic intolerance , sleep disturbances , and radiation injury .
A variety of large scale medical studies are being conducted in space via the National Space and Biomedical Research Institute ( NSBRI ) to address these issues .
Prominent among these is the Advanced Diagnostic Ultrasound in Microgravity Study in which astronauts ( including former ISS commanders Leroy Chiao and Gennady Padalka ) perform ultrasound scans under the guidance of remote experts to diagnose and potentially treat hundreds of medical conditions in space .
This study 's techniques are now being applied to cover professional and Olympic sports injuries as well as ultrasound performed by non-expert operators in medical and high school students .
It is anticipated that remote guided ultrasound will have application on Earth in emergency and rural care situations , where access to a trained physician is often rare .
On December 31 , 2012 , a NASA-supported study reported that manned spaceflight may harm the brain and accelerate the onset of Alzheimer 's disease .
In Russia , cosmonauts are awarded Pilot-Cosmonaut of the Russian Federation upon completion of their missions , often accompanied with the award of Hero of the Russian Federation .
This follows the practice established in the Soviet Union .
At NASA , those who complete astronaut candidate training receive a silver lapel pin .
Once they have flown in space , they receive a gold pin .
U.S. astronauts who also have active-duty military status receive a special qualification badge , known as the Astronaut Badge , after participation on a spaceflight .
The United States Air Force also presents an Astronaut Badge to its pilots who exceed in altitude .
Eighteen astronauts ( fourteen men and four women ) have lost their lives during four space flights .
By nationality , thirteen were American ( including one of Indian origin ) , four were Russian ( Soviet Union ) , and one was Israeli .
Eleven people ( all men ) have lost their lives training for spaceflight : eight Americans and three Russians .
Six of these were in crashes of training jet aircraft , one drowned during water recovery training , and four were due to fires in pure oxygen environments .
The Space Mirror Memorial , which stands on the grounds of the John F. Kennedy Space Center Visitor Complex , commemorates the lives of the men and women who have died during spaceflight and during training in the space programs of the United States .
In addition to twenty NASA career astronauts , the memorial includes the names of a U.S. Air Force X-15 test pilot , a U.S. Air Force officer who died while training for a then-classified military space program , and a civilian spaceflight participant .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
With a population of 3,645,257 in 2011 and an estimated population of 4,082,571 as of January 1 , 2014 , it is Canada 's fourth-most populous province and most populous of Canada 's three prairie provinces .
Alberta and its neighbour , Saskatchewan , were established as provinces on September 1 , 1905 .
Alberta is located in western Canada and is one of Canada 's three Prairie Provinces .
It is bounded by the provinces of British Columbia to the west and Saskatchewan to the east , the Northwest Territories to the north , and the U.S. state of Montana to the south .
Alberta is one of three Canadian provinces and territories to border only a single U.S. state and is also one of only two provinces that are landlocked .
Edmonton , the capital city of Alberta , is located near the geographic centre of the province and is the primary supply and service hub for Canada 's crude oil and also oil sands ( Athabasca Oil Sands ) and other northern resource industries .
Approximately south of the capital is Calgary , Alberta 's largest city .
Calgary and Edmonton centre Alberta 's two census metropolitan areas , both of which have populations exceeding one million , while the province has 16 census agglomerations .
Notable tourist destinations in the province include Banff , Canmore , Drumheller , Jasper and Sylvan Lake .
The current Premier of the province is Dave Hancock .
Alberta is named after Princess Louise Caroline Alberta ( 1848–1939 ) , the fourth daughter of Victoria , the Queen of Canada until 1901 , and Albert , Prince Consort .
Princess Louise was the wife of the Marquess of Lorne , Governor General of Canada from 1878 to 1883 .
Lake Louise and Mount Alberta were also named in honour of Princess Louise .
Alberta , with an area of , is the fourth largest province after Quebec , Ontario , and British Columbia .
To the south , the province borders on the 49th parallel north , separating it from the U.S. state of Montana , while on the north the 60th parallel north divides it from the Northwest Territories .
To the east , the 110th meridian west separates it from the province of Saskatchewan , while on the west its boundary with British Columbia follows the 120th meridian west south from the Northwest Territories at 60°N until it reaches the Continental Divide at the Rocky Mountains , and from that point follows the line of peaks marking the Continental Divide in a generally southeasterly direction until it reaches the Montana border at 49°N.
The province extends north to south and east to west at its maximum width .
Its highest point is at the summit of Mount Columbia in the Rocky Mountains along the southwest border , while its lowest point is on the Slave River in Wood Buffalo National Park in the northeast .
With the exception of the semi-arid steppe of the southeastern section , the province has adequate water resources .
There are numerous rivers and lakes used for swimming , fishing and a range of water sports .
There are three large lakes , Lake Claire ( ) in Wood Buffalo National Park , Lesser Slave Lake ( ) , and Lake Athabasca ( ) which lies in both Alberta and Saskatchewan .
The longest river in the province is the Athabasca River which travels from the Columbia Icefield in the Rocky Mountains to Lake Athabasca .
The largest river is the Peace River with an average flow of 2161 m3/s .
The Peace River originates in the Rocky Mountains of northern British Columbia and flows through northern Alberta and into the Slave River , a tributary of the Mackenzie River .
Alberta 's capital city , Edmonton , is located approximately in the geographic centre of the province .
It is the most northerly major city in Canada , and serves as a gateway and hub for resource development in northern Canada .
The region , with its proximity to Canada 's largest oil fields , has most of western Canada 's oil refinery capacity .
Calgary is located approximately south of Edmonton and north of Montana , surrounded by extensive ranching country .
Almost 75 % of the province 's population lives in the Calgary–Edmonton Corridor .
The land grant policy to the railroads served as a means to populate the province in its early years .
Most of the northern half of the province is boreal forest , while the Rocky Mountains along the southwestern boundary are largely forested ( see Alberta Mountain forests and Alberta-British Columbia foothills forests ) .
The southern quarter of the province is prairie , ranging from shortgrass prairie in the southeastern corner to mixed grass prairie in an arc to the west and north of it .
The central aspen parkland region extending in a broad arc between the prairies and the forests , from Calgary , north to Edmonton , and then east to Lloydminster , contains the most fertile soil in the province and most of the population .
Much of the unforested part of Alberta is given over either to grain or to dairy farming , with mixed farming more common in the north and centre , while ranching and irrigated agriculture predominate in the south .
The Alberta badlands are located in southeastern Alberta , where the Red Deer River crosses the flat prairie and farmland , and features deep canyons and striking landforms .
Dinosaur Provincial Park , near Brooks , Alberta , showcases the badlands terrain , desert flora , and remnants from Alberta 's past when dinosaurs roamed the then lush landscape .
Alberta has a dry continental climate with warm summers and cold winters .
The province is open to cold arctic weather systems from the north , which often produce extremely cold conditions in winter .
As the fronts between the air masses shift north and south across Alberta , the temperature can change rapidly .
Arctic air masses in the winter produce extreme minimum temperatures varying from in northern Alberta to in southern Alberta .
In the summer , continental air masses produce maximum temperatures from in the mountains to in southern Alberta .
Alberta extends for over from north to south ; its climate , therefore , varies considerably .
Average high temperatures in January range from in the southwest to in the far north .
The climate is also influenced by the presence of the Rocky Mountains to the southwest , which disrupt the flow of the prevailing westerly winds and causes them to drop most of their moisture on the western slopes of the mountain ranges before reaching the province , casting a rain shadow over much of Alberta .
The northerly location and isolation from the weather systems of the Pacific Ocean cause Alberta to have a dry climate with little moderation from the ocean .
Annual precipitation ranges from in the southeast to in the north , except in the foothills of the Rocky Mountains where total precipitation including snowfall can reach annually .
The province is the namesake of the Alberta clipper , a type of intense , fast-moving winter storm that generally forms over or near the province and pushed with great speed by the continental polar jetstream descends over the rest of Southern Canada and the northern tier of the United States .
In the summer , the average daytime temperatures range from around in the Rocky Mountain valleys and far north , up to around in the dry prairie of the southeast .
The northern and western parts of the province experience higher rainfall and lower evaporation rates caused by cooler summer temperatures .
The south and east-central portions are prone to drought-like conditions sometimes persisting for several years , although even these areas can receive heavy precipitation and sometimes resulting in flooding .
Annual bright sunshine totals range between 1900 up to just under 2600 hours per year .
Northern Alberta gets about 18 hours of daylight in the summer .
In southwestern Alberta , the cold winters are frequently interrupted by warm , dry chinook winds blowing from the mountains , which can propel temperatures upward from frigid conditions to well above the freezing point in a very short period .
During one chinook recorded at Pincher Creek , temperatures soared from in just one hour .
The region around Lethbridge has the most chinooks , averaging 30 to 35 chinook days per year .
Calgary has a 56 % chance of a white Christmas , while Edmonton has an 86 % chance .
Northern Alberta is mostly covered by boreal forest and has a subarctic climate .
The agricultural area of southern Alberta have a semi-arid steppe climate because the annual precipitation is less than the water that evaporates or is used by plants .
The southeastern corner of Alberta , part of the Palliser Triangle , experiences greater summer heat and lower rainfall than the rest of the province , and as a result suffers frequent crop yield problems and occasional severe droughts .
Western Alberta is protected by the mountains and enjoys the mild temperatures brought by winter chinook winds .
Central and parts of northwestern Alberta in the Peace River region are largely aspen parkland , a biome transitional between prairie to the south and boreal forest to the north .
After Southern Ontario , The Prairies and Central Alberta is the most likely region in Canada to experience tornadoes .
Thunderstorms , some of them severe , are frequent in the summer , especially in central and southern Alberta .
The region surrounding the Calgary–Edmonton Corridor is notable for having the highest frequency of hail in Canada , which is caused by orographic lifting from the nearby Rocky Mountains , enhancing the updraft/downdraft cycle necessary for the formation of hail .
In central and northern Alberta the arrival of spring is marked by the early flowering of the prairie crocus anemone ; this member of the buttercup family has been recorded flowering as early as March though April is the usual month for the general population .
Other prairie flora known to flower early are the golden bean and wild rose .
Members of the sunflower family blossom on the prairie in the summer months between July and September .
The southern and east central parts of Alberta are covered by short prairie grass , which dries up as summer lengthens , to be replaced by hardy perennials such as the prairie coneflower , fleabane , and sage .
Both yellow and white sweet clover can be found throughout the southern and central areas of the province .
The trees in the parkland region of the province grow in clumps and belts on the hillsides .
These are largely deciduous , typically aspen , poplar , and willow .
Many species of willow and other shrubs grow in virtually any terrain .
On the north side of the North Saskatchewan River evergreen forests prevail for thousands of square kilometres .
Aspen poplar , balsam poplar ( or cottonwood ) , and paper birch are the primary large deciduous species .
Conifers include Jack pine , Rocky Mountain pine , Lodgepole pine , both white and black spruce , and the deciduous conifer tamarack .
The four climatic regions ( alpine , boreal forest , parkland , and prairie ) of Alberta are home to many different species of animals .
The south and central prairie was the land of the bison , commonly known as buffalo , its grasses providing pasture and breeding ground for millions of buffalo .
The buffalo population was decimated during early settlement , but since then buffalo have made a comeback , living on farms and in parks all over Alberta .
Among them are the grizzly and black bears , which are found in the mountains and wooded regions .
Smaller carnivores of the canine and feline families include coyotes , wolves , fox , lynx , bobcat and mountain lion ( cougar ) .
Moose , mule deer , elk , and white-tail deer are found in the wooded regions , and pronghorn can be found in the prairies of southern Alberta .
Bighorn sheep and mountain goats live in the Rocky Mountains .
Rabbits , porcupines , skunks , squirrels and many species of rodents and reptiles live in every corner of the province .
Alberta is home to only one variety of venomous snake , the prairie rattlesnake .
Alberta is the only province in Canada—as well as one of the few places in the world—that is free of Norwegian rats .
Since the early 1950s , the Government of Alberta has operated a rat-control program , which has been so successful that only isolated instances of wild rat sightings are reported , usually of rats arriving in the province aboard trucks or by rail .
In 2006 , Alberta Agriculture reported zero findings of wild rats ; the only rat interceptions have been domesticated rats that have been seized from their owners .
It is illegal for individual Albertans to own or keep Norwegian rats of any description ; the animals can only be kept in the province by zoos , universities and colleges , and recognized research institutions .
found and captured , in small pockets in southern Alberta , putting Alberta 's rat-free status in jeopardy .
A colony of rats were subsequently found in a landfill near Medicine Hat in 2012 , and again in 2014 .
Alberta has one of the greatest diversities and abundances of Late Cretaceous dinosaur fossils in the world .
Taxa are represented by complete fossil skeletons , isolated material , microvertebrate remains , and even mass graves .
At least 38 dinosaur type specimens were collected in the province .
The Foremost Formation , Oldman Formation and Dinosaur Park Formations collectively comprise the Judith River Group and are the most thoroughly studied dinosaur-bearing strata in Alberta .
The Dinosaur Provincial Park area contains outcrops of the Dinosaur Park Formation and Oldman Formation .
In the central and southern regions of Alberta are intermittent Scollard Formation outcrops .
In the Drumheller Valley and Edmonton regions there are exposed Horseshoe Canyon facies .
Other formations have been recorded as well , like the Milk River and Foremost Formations .
However , these latter two have a lower diversity of documented dinosaurs , primarily due to their lower total fossil quantity and neglect from collectors who are hindered by the isolation and scarcity of exposed outcrops .
Their dinosaur fossils are primarily teeth recovered from microvertebrate fossil sites .
Additional geologic formations that have produced only few fossils are the Belly River Group and St . Mary River Formations of the southwest and the northwestern Wapiti Formation .
The Wapiti Formations contains two " Pachyrhinosaurus " bone beds that break its general trend of low productivity , however .
The Bearpaw Formation represents strata deposited during a marine transgression .
Dinosaurs are known from this Formation , but represent specimens washed out to sea or reworked from older sediments .
Paleo-Indians arrived in Alberta at least 10,000 years ago , toward the end of the last ice age .
They are thought to have migrated from Siberia to Alaska on a land bridge across the Bering Strait , and then may have moved down the east side of the Rocky Mountains through Alberta to settle the Americas .
Others may have migrated down the coast of British Columbia and then moved inland .
Over time they differentiated into various First Nations peoples , including the Plains Indian tribes of southern Alberta such as those of the Blackfoot Confederacy and the Plains Cree , who generally lived by hunting buffalo ( American bison ) , and the more northerly tribes such as the Woodland Cree and Chipewyan who hunted , trapped , and fished for a living .
After the British arrival in Canada , approximately half of the province of Alberta , south of the Athabasca River drainage , became part of Rupert 's Land which consisted of all land drained by rivers flowing into Hudson Bay .
This area was granted by Charles II of England to the Hudson 's Bay Company ( HBC ) in 1670 , and rival fur trading companies were not allowed to trade in it .
After the arrival of French Canadians in the west around 1731 , they settled near fur trading posts , establishing communities such as Lac La Biche and Bonnyville .
Fort La Jonquière was established near what is now Calgary in 1752 .
The Athabasca River and the rivers north of it were not in HBC territory because they drained into the Arctic Ocean instead of Hudson Bay , and they were prime habitat for fur-bearing animals .
The first explorer of the Athabasca region was Peter Pond , who learned of the Methye Portage , which allowed travel from southern rivers into the rivers north of Rupert 's Land .
Fur traders formed the North West Company ( NWC ) of Montreal to compete with the HBC in 1779 .
The NWC occupied the northern part of Alberta territory .
Peter Pond built Fort Athabasca on Lac la Biche in 1778 .
Roderick Mackenzie built Fort Chipewyan on Lake Athabasca ten years later in 1788 .
His cousin , Sir Alexander Mackenzie , followed the North Saskatchewan River to its northernmost point near Edmonton , then setting northward on foot , trekked to the Athabasca River , which he followed to Lake Athabasca .
It was there he discovered the mighty outflow river which bears his name—the Mackenzie River—which he followed to its outlet in the Arctic Ocean .
Returning to Lake Athabasca , he followed the Peace River upstream , eventually reaching the Pacific Ocean , and so he became the first European to cross the North American continent north of Mexico .
The extreme southernmost portion of Alberta was part of the French ( and Spanish ) territory of Louisiana , sold to the United States in 1803 ; in 1818 , the portion of Louisiana north of the Forty-Ninth Parallel was ceded to Great Britain .
Fur trade expanded in the north , but bloody battles occurred between the rival HBC and NWC , and in 1821 the British government forced them to merge to stop the hostilities .
The amalgamated Hudson 's Bay Company dominated trade in Alberta until 1870 , when the newly formed Canadian Government purchased Rupert 's Land .
Northern Alberta was included in the North-Western Territory until 1870 , when it and Rupert 's land became Canada 's Northwest Territories .
The District of Alberta was created as part of the North-West Territories in 1882 .
As settlement increased , local representatives to the North-West Legislative Assembly were added .
After a long campaign for autonomy , in 1905 the District of Alberta was enlarged and given provincial status , with the election of Alexander Cameron Rutherford as the first premier .
On June 21 , 2013 , during the 2013 Alberta floods Alberta experienced heavy rainfall that triggered catastrophic flooding throughout much of the southern half of the province along the Bow , Elbow , Highwood and Oldman rivers and tributaries .
A dozen municipalities in Southern Alberta declared local states of emergency on June 21 as water levels rose and numerous communities were placed under evacuation orders .
In the 2011 census , Alberta had a population of 3,645,257 living in 1,390,275 of its 1,505,007 total dwellings , a 10.8 % change from its 2006 population of 3,290,350 .
With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2011 .
In 2013 , Statistics Canada estimated the province 's population to be 4,025,073 .
Alberta has experienced a relatively high rate of growth in recent years , mainly because of its burgeoning economy .
Between 2003 and 2004 , the province had high birthrates ( on par with some larger provinces such as British Columbia ) , relatively high immigration , and a high rate of interprovincial migration when compared to other provinces .
As of the 2011 Census , seven of the eight fastest-growing census agglomerations in Canada were in Alberta .
Approximately 81 % of the population live in urban areas and only about 19 % live in rural areas .
The Calgary-Edmonton Corridor is the most urbanized area in the province and is one of the most densely populated areas of Canada .
Many of Alberta 's cities and towns have also experienced very high rates of growth in recent history .
Over the past century , Alberta 's population rose from 73,022 in 1901 to 2,974,807 in 2001 and 3,290,350 according to the 2006 census .
The 2006 census found that English , with 2,576,670 native speakers , was the most common mother tongue of Albertans , representing 79.99 % of the province 's population .
The next most common mother tongues were various Chinese languages with 97,275 native speakers ( 3.02 % ) , followed by German with 84,505 native speakers ( 2.62 % ) and French with 61,225 ( 1.90 % ) .
Other mother tongues ( in decreasing order ) include : Punjabi , with 36,320 native speakers ( 1.13 % ) ; Tagalog , with 29 ,740 ( 0.92 % ) ; Ukrainian , with 29,455 ( 0.91 % ) ; Spanish , with 29 ,125 ( 0.90 % ) ; Polish , with 21,990 ( 0.68 % ) ; Arabic , with 20,495 ( 0.64 % ) ; Dutch , with 19,980 ( 0.62 % ) ; and Vietnamese , with 19,350 ( 0.60 % ) .
The most common aboriginal language is Cree 17,215 ( 0.53 % ) .
Other common mother tongues include Italian with 13,095 speakers ( 0.41 % ) ; Urdu with 11,275 ( 0.35 % ) ; and Korean with 10,845 ( 0.33 % ) ; then Hindi 8,985 ( 0.28 % ) ; Persian 7,700 ( 0.24 % ) ; Portuguese 7,205 ( 0.22 % ) ; and Hungarian 6,770 ( 0.21 % ) . "( Figures shown are for the number of single language responses and the percentage of total single-language responses . ) "
In line with the rest of Canada , many immigrants originated from England , Scotland , Ireland and Wales , but large numbers also came from other parts of Europe , notably Germany , France , Ukraine and Scandinavia .
According to Statistics Canada , Alberta is home to the second highest proportion ( two percent ) of Francophones in western Canada ( after Manitoba ) .
Despite this , relatively few Albertans claim French as their mother tongue .
Many of Alberta 's French-speaking residents live in the central and northwestern regions of the province .
As reported in the 2001 census , the Chinese represented nearly four percent of Alberta 's population , and East Indians represented more than two percent .
Both Edmonton and Calgary have historic Chinatowns , and Calgary has Canada 's third largest Chinese community .
The Chinese presence began with workers employed in the building of the Canadian Pacific Railway in the 1880s .
Aboriginal Albertans make up approximately three percent of the population .
In the 2006 Canadian census , the most commonly reported ethnic origins among Albertans were : 885,825 English ( 27.2 % ) ; 679,705 German ( 20.9 % ) ; 667,405 Canadian ( 20.5 % ) ; 661,265 Scottish ( 20.3 % ) ; 539,160 Irish ( 16.6 % ) ; 388,210 French ( 11.9 % ) ; 332,180 Ukrainian ( 10.2 % ) ; 172,910 Dutch ( 5.3 % ) ; 170,935 Polish ( 5.2 % ) ; 169,355 North American Indian ( 5.2 % ) ; 144,585 Norwegian ( 4.4 % ) ; and 137,600 Chinese ( 4.2 % ) .
( Each person could choose as many ethnicities as were applicable . ) "
Amongst those of British origins , the Scots have had a particularly strong influence on place-names , with the names of many cities and towns including Calgary , Airdrie , Canmore , and Banff having Scottish origins .
Alberta is the third most diverse province in terms of visible minorities after British Columbia and Ontario with 13.9 % of the population consisting of visible minorities .
Nearly one-fourth of the populations of Calgary and Edmonton belong to a visible minority group .
Aboriginal Identity Peoples make up 5.8 % of the population , about half of whom consist of North American Indians and the other half are Metis .
There are also small number of Inuit people in Alberta .
The number of Aboriginal Identity Peoples have been increasing at a rate greater than the population of Alberta .
As of the Canada 2001 Census the largest religious group was Roman Catholic , representing 25.7 % of the population .
Alberta had the second highest percentage of non-religious residents in Canada ( after British Columbia ) at 23.1 % of the population .
Of the remainder , 13.5 % of the population identified themselves as belonging to the United Church of Canada , while 5.9 % were Anglican .
Lutherans made up 4.8 % of the population while Baptists comprised 2.5 % .
The remainder belonged to a wide variety of different religious affiliations , none of which constituted more than 2 % of the population .
The LDS Church of Alberta reside primarily in the extreme south of the province and made up 1.7 % of the population .
Alberta has a population of Hutterites , a communal Anabaptist sect similar to the Mennonites ( Hutterites represented 0.4 % of the population while Mennonites were 0.8 % ) , and has a significant population of Seventh-day Adventists at 0.3 % .
Alberta is home to several Byzantine Rite Churches as part of the legacy of Eastern European immigration , including the Ukrainian Catholic Eparchy of Edmonton , and the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Canada 's Western Diocese which is based in Edmonton .
Muslims constituted 1.7 % of the population , Sikhs 0.8 % and Hindus 0.5 % .
Many of these are recent immigrants , but others have roots that go back to the first settlers of the prairies .
Canada 's oldest mosque , the Al-Rashid Mosque , is located in Edmonton , whereas Calgary is home to Canada 's largest mosque , the Baitun Nur mosque .
Most of Alberta 's 13,000 Jews live in Calgary (7,500 ) and Edmonton (5,000 ) .
Alberta 's economy is one of the strongest in Canada , supported by the burgeoning petroleum industry and to a lesser extent , agriculture and technology .
The per capita GDP in 2007 was by far the highest of any province in Canada at C$ 74,825 .
This was 61 % higher than the national average of C$ 46,441 and more than twice that of some of the Atlantic provinces .
In 2006 the deviation from the national average was the largest for any province in Canadian history .
According to the 2006 census , the median annual family income after taxes was $ 70,986 in Alberta ( compared to $ 60,270 in Canada as a whole ) .
The Calgary-Edmonton Corridor is the most urbanized region in the province and one of the densest in Canada .
The region covers a distance of roughly 400 kilometres north to south .
In 2001 , the population of the Calgary-Edmonton Corridor was 2.15 million ( 72 % of Alberta 's population ) .
It is also one of the fastest growing regions in the country .
A 2003 study by TD Bank Financial Group found the corridor to be the only Canadian urban centre to amass a U.S. level of wealth while maintaining a Canadian style quality of life , offering universal health care benefits .
The study found that GDP per capita in the corridor was 10 % above average U.S. metropolitan areas and 40 % above other Canadian cities at that time .
The Fraser Institute states that Alberta also has very high levels of economic freedom and rates Alberta as the freest economy in Canada , and the second freest economy amongst U.S. states and Canadian provinces .
The government of Alberta has invested its earnings wisely ; as of 30 September 2013 , official statistics reported nearly 500 holdings .
Alberta is the largest producer of conventional crude oil , synthetic crude , natural gas and gas products in Canada .
Alberta is the world’s second largest exporter of natural gas and the fourth largest producer .
Two of the largest producers of petrochemicals in North America are located in central and north-central Alberta .
In both Red Deer and Edmonton , polyethylene and vinyl manufacturers produce products that are shipped all over the world .
Edmonton 's oil refineries provide the raw materials for a large petrochemical industry to the east of Edmonton .
The Athabasca oil sands surrounding Fort McMurray have estimated unconventional oil reserves approximately equal to the conventional oil reserves of the rest of the world , estimated to be 1.6 trillion barrels ( 254 km3 ) .
Many companies employ both conventional strip mining and non-conventional in situ methods to extract the bitumen from the oil sands .
As of late 2006 there were over $ 100 billion in oil sands projects under construction or in the planning stages in northeastern Alberta .
Another factor determining the viability of oil extraction from the oil sands is the price of oil .
The oil price increases since 2003 have made it profitable to extract this oil , which in the past would give little profit or even a loss .
With concerted effort and support from the provincial government , several high-tech industries have found their birth in Alberta , notably patents related to interactive liquid crystal display systems .
With a growing economy , Alberta has several financial institutions dealing with civil and private funds .
Agriculture has a significant position in the province 's economy .
The province has over three million head of cattle , and Alberta beef has a healthy worldwide market .
Nearly one half of all Canadian beef is produced in Alberta .
Alberta is one of the top producers of plains buffalo ( bison ) for the consumer market .
Sheep for wool and mutton are also raised .
Wheat and canola are primary farm crops , with Alberta leading the provinces in spring wheat production ; other grains are also prominent .
Much of the farming is dryland farming , often with fallow seasons interspersed with cultivation .
Continuous cropping ( in which there is no fallow season ) is gradually becoming a more common mode of production because of increased profits and a reduction of soil erosion .
Across the province , the once common grain elevator is slowly being lost as rail lines are decreasing ; farmers typically truck the grain to central points .
Alberta is the leading beekeeping province of Canada , with some beekeepers wintering hives indoors in specially designed barns in southern Alberta , then migrating north during the summer into the Peace River valley where the season is short but the working days are long for honeybees to produce honey from clover and fireweed .
Hybrid canola also requires bee pollination , and some beekeepers service this need .
The vast northern forest reserves of softwood allow Alberta to produce large quantities of lumber , oriented strand board ( OSB ) and plywood , and several plants in northern Alberta supply North America and the Pacific Rim nations with bleached wood pulp and newsprint .
Alberta has been a tourist destination from the early days of the twentieth century , with attractions including outdoor locales for skiing , hiking and camping , shopping locales such as West Edmonton Mall , Calgary Stampede , outdoor festivals , professional athletic events , international sporting competitions such as the Commonwealth Games and Olympic Games , as well as more eclectic attractions .
There are also natural attractions like Elk Island National Park , Wood Buffalo National Park , and the Columbia Icefield .
According to Alberta Economic Development , Calgary and Edmonton both host over four million visitors annually .
Banff , Jasper and the Rocky Mountains are visited by about three million people per year .
Alberta tourism relies heavily on Southern Ontario tourists , as well as tourists from other parts of Canada , the United States , and many international countries .
Alberta 's Rocky Mountains include well-known tourist destinations Banff National Park and Jasper National Park .
The two mountain parks are connected by the scenic Icefields Parkway .
Banff is located west of Calgary on Highway 1 , and Jasper is located west of Edmonton on Yellowhead Highway .
Five of Canada 's fourteen UNESCO World heritage sites are located within the province : Canadian Rocky Mountain Parks , Waterton-Glacier International Peace Park , Wood Buffalo National Park , Dinosaur Provincial Park and Head-Smashed-In Buffalo Jump .
About 1.2 million people visit the of Calgary Stampede , a celebration of Canada 's own Wild West and the cattle ranching industry .
About 700,000 people enjoy Edmonton 's K-Days ( formerly Klondike Days and Capital EX ) .
Edmonton was the gateway to the only all-Canadian route to the Yukon gold fields , and the only route which did not require gold-seekers to travel the exhausting and dangerous Chilkoot Pass .
Another tourist destination that draws more than 650,000 visitors each year is the Drumheller Valley , located northeast of Calgary .
Drumheller , " Dinosaur Capital of The World " , offers the Royal Tyrrell Museum of Palaeontology .
Drumheller also had a rich mining history being one of Western Canada 's largest coal producers during the war years .
Located in east-central Alberta is Alberta Prairie Railway Excursions , a popular tourist attraction operated out of Stettler , that offers train excursions into the prairie and caters to tens of thousands of visitors every year .
Alberta has numerous ski resorts most notably Sunshine Village , Lake Louise , Marmot Basin , Norquay and Nakiska .
The Government of Alberta is organized as a parliamentary democracy with a unicameral legislature .
Its unicameral legislature—the Legislative Assembly—consists of eighty-seven members elected first past the post ( FPTP ) from single-member constituencies .
Locally municipal governments and school boards are elected and operate separately .
Municipalities where the same body act as both local government and school board are formally referred to as " counties " in Alberta .
As Canada 's head of state , Queen Elizabeth II is the head of state for the Government of Alberta .
Her duties in Alberta are carried out by Lieutenant Governor Donald Ethell .
Although the lieutenant governor is technically the most powerful person in Alberta , he is in reality a figurehead whose actions are restricted by custom and constitutional convention .
The government is therefore headed by the premier .
The current premier is Dave Hancock who was appointed as the interim leader of the governing Progressive Conservatives on March 20 , 2014 .
Hancock was sworn in as the 15th Premier of Alberta on March 23 , 2014 .
The Premier is a Member of the Legislative Assembly , and he draws all the members of his Cabinet from among the members of the Legislative Assembly .
The City of Edmonton is the seat of the provincial government—the capital of Alberta .
Alberta 's elections tend to yield results which are much more conservative than those of other Canadian provinces .
Alberta has traditionally had three political parties , the Progressive Conservatives ( " Conservatives " or " Tories " ) , the Liberals , and the social democratic New Democrats .
A fourth party , the strongly conservative Social Credit Party , was a power in Alberta for many decades , but fell from the political map after the Progressive Conservatives came to power in 1971 .
Since that time , no other political party has governed Alberta .
Only four parties have governed Alberta : the Liberals , from 1905 to 1921 ; the United Farmers of Alberta , from 1921 to 1935 ; the Social Credit Party , from 1935 to 1971 , and the currently governing Progressive Conservative Party , from 1971 to the present .
Alberta has had occasional surges in separatist sentiment .
Even during the 1980s , when these feelings were at their strongest , there has never been enough interest in secession to initiate any major movements or referendums .
There are several currently active groups wishing to promote the independence of Alberta in some form .
In the 2008 provincial election , held on March 3 , 2008 , the Progressive Conservative Party was re-elected as a majority government with 72 of 83 seats , the Alberta Liberal Party was elected as the Official Opposition with nine members , and two Alberta New Democratic Party members were elected .
The April 23 , 2012 election returned the Progressive Conservative Party to government , making leader Alison Redford Alberta 's first elected female premier .
In the 2012 provincial election , held on April 23 , 2012 , the Progressive Conservative Party was re-elected as a majority government and party leader Alison Redford retained as premier with 43.9 % of the vote and 61 of 87 seats ( The Legislative Assembly added 4 seats , increasing the total to 87 , with the 2012 election ) , the Wildrose Party led by Danielle Smith was elected as the Official Opposition with 34.3 % of the vote and 17 members ( replacing the Liberal Party ) , five Liberals were elected with 9.9 % of the vote and four NDP members were elected with 9.8 % of the vote .
Government revenue comes mainly from royalties on non-renewable natural resources ( 30.4 % ) , personal income taxes ( 22.3 % ) , corporate and other taxes ( 19.6 % ) , and grants from the federal government primarily for infrastructure projects ( 9.8 % ) .
Albertans are the lowest-taxed people in Canada , and Alberta is the only province in Canada without a provincial sales tax ( but residents are still subject to the federal sales tax , the Goods and Services Tax of 5 % ) .
It is also the only Canadian province to have a flat tax for personal income taxes , which is 10 % of taxable income .
The Alberta personal income tax system maintains a progressive character by granting residents personal tax exemptions of $ 17,787 , in addition to a variety of tax deductions for persons with disabilities , students , and the aged .
Alberta 's municipalities and school jurisdictions have their own governments who usually work in co-operation with the provincial government .
The privatization increased outlets from 304 stores to 1,726 ; 1,300 jobs to 4,000 jobs ; and 3,325 products to 16,495 products .
Tax revenue also increased from $ 400 million to $ 700 million .
Albertan municipalities raise a significant portion of their income through levying property taxes .
The value of assessed property in Alberta was approximately $ 727 billion in 2011 .
Most real property is assessed according to its market value .
The exceptions to market value assessment are farmland , railways , machinery & equipment and linear property , all of which is assessed by regulated rates .
Depending on the property type , property owners may appeal a property assessment to their municipal ' Local Assessment Review Board ' , ' Composite Assessment Review Board , ' or the Alberta Municipal Government Board .
Military bases in Alberta include Canadian Forces Base ( CFB) Cold Lake , CFB Edmonton , CFB Suffield and CFB Wainwright .
The air force is stationed at CFB Cold Lake and has access to the Cold Lake Air Weapons Range .
CFB Edmonton is the headquarters for the 3rd Canadian Division .
CFB Suffield hosts British troops and is the largest training facility in Canada .
Alberta has over of highways and roads , of which nearly are paved .
The main north-south corridor is Highway 2 , which begins south of Cardston at the Carway border crossing and is part of the CANAMEX Corridor .
Highway 4 , which effectively extends Interstate 15 into Alberta and is the busiest U.S. gateway to the province , begins at the Coutts border crossing and ends at Lethbridge .
Highway 3 joins Lethbridge to Fort Macleod and links Highway 4 to Highway 2. Highway 2 travels northward through Fort Macleod , Calgary , Red Deer , and Edmonton .
North of Edmonton , the highway continues to Athabasca , then northwesterly along the south shore of Lesser Slave Lake into High Prairie , north to Peace River , west to Fairview and finally south to Grande Prairie , where it ends at an interchange with Highway 43 .
The section of Highway 2 between Calgary and Edmonton has been named the Queen Elizabeth II Highway to commemorate the visit of the monarch in 2005 .
Highway 2 is supplemented by two more highways that run parallel to it : Highway 22 , west of Highway 2 , known as " Cowboy Trail" , and Highway 21 , east of Highway 2. Highway 43 travels northwest into Grande Prairie and the Peace River Country ; Highway 63 travels northeast to Fort McMurray , the location of the Athabasca oil sands .
The southern corridor , part of the Trans-Canada Highway system , enters the province near Medicine Hat , runs westward through Calgary , and leaves Alberta through Banff National Park .
The northern corridor , also part of the Trans-Canada network and known as the Yellowhead Highway ( Highway 16 ) , runs west from Lloydminster in eastern Alberta , through Edmonton and Jasper National Park into British Columbia .
One of the most scenic drives is along the Icefields Parkway , which runs for between Jasper and Lake Louise , with mountain ranges and glaciers on either side of its entire length .
Another major corridor through central Alberta is Highway 11 ( also known as the David Thompson Highway ) , which runs east from the Saskatchewan River Crossing in Banff National Park through Rocky Mountain House and Red Deer , connecting with Highway 12 west of Stettler .
The highway connects many of the smaller towns in central Alberta with Calgary and Edmonton , as it crosses Highway 2 just west of Red Deer .
Urban stretches of Alberta 's major highways and freeways are often called " trails " .
For example , Highway 2 , the main north-south highway in the province , is called Deerfoot Trail as it passes through Calgary but becomes Calgary Trail ( for southbound traffic ) and Gateway Boulevard ( for northbound traffic ) as it enters Edmonton and then turns into St .
Albert Trail as it leaves Edmonton for the City of St . Albert .
Calgary , in particular , has a tradition of calling its largest urban expressways " trails " and naming many of them after prominent First Nations individuals and tribes , such as Crowchild Trail , Deerfoot Trail , and Stoney Trail .
Calgary , Edmonton , Red Deer , Medicine Hat , and Lethbridge have substantial public transit systems .
In addition to buses , Calgary and Edmonton operate light rail transit ( LRT ) systems .
Edmonton LRT , which is underground in the downtown core and on the surface outside the CBD , was the first of the modern generation of light rail systems to be built in North America , while the Calgary C-Train has one of the highest number of daily riders of any LRT system in North America .
Alberta is well-connected by air , with international airports in both Calgary and Edmonton .
Calgary International Airport and Edmonton International Airport are the fourth and fifth busiest in Canada respectively .
Calgary 's airport is a hub for WestJet Airlines and a regional hub for Air Canada .
Calgary 's airport primarily serves the Canadian prairie provinces ( Alberta , Saskatchewan and Manitoba ) for connecting flights to British Columbia , eastern Canada , 15 major US centres , nine European airports , one Asian airport and four destinations in Mexico and the Caribbean .
Edmonton 's airport acts as a hub for the Canadian north and has connections to all major Canadian airports as well as 10 major US airports , 3 European airports and 6 Mexican and Caribbean airports .
There are more than of operating mainline railway ; the Canadian Pacific Railway and Canadian National Railway companies operate railway freight across the province .
Passenger trains include Via Rail 's Canadian ( Toronto-Vancouver ) or Jasper-Prince Rupert trains , which use the CN mainline and pass through Jasper National Park and parallel the Yellowhead Highway during at least part of their routes .
The Rocky Mountaineer operates two sections : one from Vancouver to Banff and Calgary over CP tracks , and a section that travels over CN tracks to Jasper .
Alberta provides a publicly funded health care system , Alberta Health Services , for all its citizens and residents as set out by the provisions of the Canada Health Act of 1984 .
Alberta became Canada 's second province ( after Saskatchewan ) to adopt a Tommy Douglas-style program in 1950 , a precursor to the modern medicare system .
Alberta 's health care budget is currently $ 17.1 billion during the 2013–2014 fiscal year ( approximately 45 % of all government spending ) , making it the best funded health care system per-capita in Canada .
Every hour more than $ 1.9 million is spent on health care in the province .
Notable health , education , research , and resources facilities in Alberta , all of which are located within Calgary or Edmonton :
The Edmonton Clinic complex , completed in 2012 , provides a similar research , education , and care environment as the Mayo Clinic in the United States .
All public health care services funded by the Government of Alberta are delivered operationally by Alberta Health Services .
AHS is the province 's single health authority established on July 1 , 2008 , which replaced nine local health authorities .
AHS also funds all ground ambulance services in the province , as well as the province-wide STARS ( Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society ) air ambulance service .
As with any Canadian province , the Alberta Legislature has ( almost ) exclusive authority to make laws respecting education .
Since 1905 the Legislature has used this capacity to continue the model of locally elected public and separate school boards which originated prior to 1905 , as well as to create and/or regulate universities , colleges , technical institutions and other educational forms and institutions ( public charter schools , private schools , home schooling ) .
There are forty-two public school jurisdictions in Alberta , and seventeen operating separate school jurisdictions .
Sixteen of the operating separate school jurisdictions have a Catholic electorate , and one ( St .
In addition , one Protestant separate school district , Glen Avon , survives as a ward of the St . Paul Education Region .
The City of Lloydminster straddles the Alberta/Saskatchewan border , and both the public and separate school systems in that city are counted in the above numbers : both of them operate according to Saskatchewan law .
For many years the provincial government has funded the greater part of the cost of providing K–12 education .
Prior to 1994 public and separate school boards in Alberta had the legislative authority to levy a local tax on property as a supplementary support for local education .
In 1994 the government of the province eliminated this right for public school boards , but not for separate school boards .
Since 1994 there has continued to be a tax on property in support of K–12 education ; the difference is that the mill rate is now set by the provincial government , the money is collected by the local municipal authority and remitted to the provincial government .
The relevant legislation requires that all the money raised by this property tax must go to the support of K–12 education provided by school boards .
The provincial government pools the property tax funds from across the province and distributes them , according to a formula , to public and separate school jurisdictions and Francophone authorities .
Public and separate school boards , charter schools , and private schools all follow the Program of Studies and the curriculum approved by the provincial department of education ( Alberta Education ) .
Homeschool tutors may choose to follow the Program of Studies or develop their own Program of Studies .
Public and separate schools , charter schools , and approved private schools all employ teachers who are certificated by Alberta Education , they administer Provincial Achievement Tests and Diploma Examinations set by Alberta Education , and they may grant high school graduation certificates endorsed by Alberta Education .
The University of Alberta , established in Edmonton in 1908 , is Alberta 's oldest and largest university .
The University of Calgary , once affiliated with the University of Alberta , gained its autonomy in 1966 and is now the second largest university in Alberta .
There is also Athabasca University , which focuses on distance learning , and the University of Lethbridge , both of which are located in their title cities .
In early September 2009 , Mount Royal University became Calgary 's second public university , and in late September 2009 , a similar move made MacEwan University Edmonton 's second public university .
There are 15 colleges that receive direct public funding , along with two technical institutes , Northern Alberta Institute of Technology and Southern Alberta Institute of Technology .
There is also a large and active private sector of post-secondary institutions , mostly Christian Universities , bringing the total number of universities to twelve , plus a DeVry University in Calgary , the only location in Canada .
Students may also receive government loans and grants while attending selected private institutions .
There has been some controversy in recent years over the rising cost of post-secondary education for students ( as opposed to taxpayers ) .
In 2005 , Premier Ralph Klein made a promise that he would freeze tuition and look into ways of reducing schooling costs .
So far , no plan has been released by the Government of Alberta .
Summer brings many festivals to the province of Alberta , especially in Edmonton .
The Edmonton Fringe Festival is the world 's second largest after the Edinburgh Festival .
Both Calgary and Edmonton host a number of annual festivals and events including folk music festivals .
The city 's "heritage days " festival sees the participation of over 70 ethnic groups .
Edmonton 's Churchill Square is home to a large number of the festivals , including the large Taste of Edmonton & The Works Art & Design Festival throughout the summer months .
The City of Calgary is also famous for its Stampede , dubbed " The Greatest Outdoor Show on Earth . "
The Stampede is Canada 's biggest rodeo festival and features various races and competitions , such as calf roping and bull riding .
In line with the western tradition of rodeo are the cultural artisans that reside and create unique Alberta western heritage crafts .
The Banff Centre hosts a range of festivals and other events including the international Mountain Film Festival .
These cultural events in Alberta highlight the province 's cultural diversity .
Most of the major cities have several performing theatre companies who entertain in venues as diverse as Edmonton 's Arts Barns and the Francis Winspear Centre for Music .
Both Calgary and Edmonton are home to Canadian Football League and National Hockey League teams .
Soccer , rugby union and lacrosse are also played professionally in Alberta .
Alberta has relationships with several provinces , states , and other entities worldwide .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Abortion is the termination of pregnancy by the removal or expulsion from the uterus of a fetus or embryo before viability .
An abortion can occur spontaneously , in which case it is often called a miscarriage , or it can be purposely induced .
The term "abortion " most commonly refers to the induced abortion of a human pregnancy .
After viability , the relevant procedure is referred to as a "late termination of pregnancy" .
Modern medicine utilizes medications and surgical procedures for induced abortion .
Abortion , when induced in the developed world in accordance with local law , is among the safest procedures in medicine .
Uncomplicated abortions do not cause either long term psychological or physical problems .
Unsafe abortions , however , result in approximately 47,000 maternal deaths and 5 million hospital admissions per year globally .
An estimated 44 million abortions are performed globally each year , with slightly under half of those performed unsafely .
The number of abortions has stabilized in recent years , having previously spent decades declining as access to family planning education and contraceptive services increased .
Forty percent of the world 's women have access to legal induced abortions ( within gestational limits ) .
Induced abortion has a long history and has been performed by various methods , including herbal abortifacients , the use of sharpened tools , physical trauma , and other traditional methods .
The legality , prevalence , cultural and religious status of abortion vary substantially around the world .
Its legality can depend on specific conditions , such as incest , rape , fetal defects , a high risk of disability , socioeconomic factors or the mother 's health being at risk .
In many parts of the world there is prominent and divisive public controversy over the moral , ethical , and legal issues of abortion .
Those who are against abortion generally posit that an embryo or fetus is a human with the right to life and may equate abortion with homicide , while proponents of abortion rights emphasize a woman 's right to decide about matters concerning her own body .
Approximately 205 million pregnancies occur each year worldwide .
Over a third are unintended and about a fifth end in induced abortion .
In the United Kingdom 1 to 2 % of abortions are done due to genetic problems in the fetus .
A pregnancy can be intentionally aborted in several ways .
The manner selected often depends upon the gestational age of the embryo or fetus , which increases in size as the pregnancy progresses .
Specific procedures may also be selected due to legality , regional availability , and doctor or patient preference .
Reasons for procuring induced abortions are typically characterized as either therapeutic or elective .
An abortion is medically referred to as a therapeutic abortion when it is performed to save the life of the pregnant woman ; prevent harm to the woman 's physical or mental health ; terminate a pregnancy where indications are that the child will have a significantly increased chance of premature morbidity or mortality or be otherwise disabled ; or to selectively reduce the number of fetuses to lessen health risks associated with multiple pregnancy .
An abortion is referred to as an elective or voluntary abortion when it is performed at the request of the woman for non-medical reasons .
Confusion sometimes arises over the term "elective " because "elective surgery " generally refers to all scheduled surgery , whether medically necessary or not .
Spontaneous abortion , also known as miscarriage , is the unintentional expulsion of an embryo or fetus before the 24th week of gestation .
A pregnancy that ends before 37 weeks of gestation resulting in a live-born infant is known as a "premature birth " or a "preterm birth" .
When a fetus dies in utero after viability , or during delivery , it is usually termed " stillborn " .
Premature births and stillbirths are generally not considered to be miscarriages although usage of these terms can sometimes overlap .
Only 30 % to 50 % of conceptions progress past the first trimester .
The vast majority of those that do not progress are lost before the woman is aware of the conception , and many pregnancies are lost before medical practitioners can detect an embryo .
Between 15 % and 30 % of known pregnancies end in clinically apparent miscarriage , depending upon the age and health of the pregnant woman .
The most common cause of spontaneous abortion during the first trimester is chromosomal abnormalities of the embryo or fetus , accounting for at least 50 % of sampled early pregnancy losses .
Other causes include vascular disease ( such as lupus ) , diabetes , other hormonal problems , infection , and abnormalities of the uterus .
Advancing maternal age and a patient history of previous spontaneous abortions are the two leading factors associated with a greater risk of spontaneous abortion .
A spontaneous abortion can also be caused by accidental trauma ; intentional trauma or stress to cause miscarriage is considered induced abortion or feticide .
Medical abortions are those induced by abortifacient pharmaceuticals .
Medical abortion became an alternative method of abortion with the availability of prostaglandin analogs in the 1970s and the antiprogestogen mifepristone in the 1980s .
The most common early first-trimester medical abortion regimens use mifepristone in combination with a prostaglandin analog ( misoprostol or gemeprost ) up to 9 weeks gestational age , methotrexate in combination with a prostaglandin analog up to 7 weeks gestation , or a prostaglandin analog alone .
Mifepristone–misoprostol combination regimens work faster and are more effective at later gestational ages than methotrexate–misoprostol combination regimens , and combination regimens are more effective than misoprostol alone .
This regime is effective in the second trimester .
In very early abortions , up to 7 weeks gestation , medical abortion using a mifepristone–misoprostol combination regimen is considered to be more effective than surgical abortion (vacuum aspiration ) , especially when clinical practice does not include detailed inspection of aspirated tissue .
Early medical abortion regimens using mifepristone , followed 24–48 hours later by buccal or vaginal misoprostol are 98 % effective up to 9 weeks gestational age .
If medical abortion fails , surgical abortion must be used to complete the procedure .
Early medical abortions account for the majority of abortions before 9 weeks gestation in Britain , France , Switzerland , and the Nordic countries .
In the United States , the percentage of early medical abortions is far lower .
Medical abortion regimens using mifepristone in combination with a prostaglandin analog are the most common methods used for second-trimester abortions in Canada , most of Europe , China and India , in contrast to the United States where 96 % of second-trimester abortions are performed surgically by dilation and evacuation .
Up to 15 weeks ' gestation , suction-aspiration or vacuum aspiration are the most common surgical methods of induced abortion .
" Manual vacuum aspiration " ( MVA ) consists of removing the fetus or embryo , placenta , and membranes by suction using a manual syringe , while "electric vacuum aspiration " ( EVA ) uses an electric pump .
These techniques differ in the mechanism used to apply suction , in how early in pregnancy they can be used , and in whether cervical dilation is necessary .
MVA , also known as "mini-suction " and "menstrual extraction" , can be used in very early pregnancy , and does not require cervical dilation .
Dilation and curettage ( D&C ) , the second most common method of surgical abortion , is a standard gynecological procedure performed for a variety of reasons , including examination of the uterine lining for possible malignancy , investigation of abnormal bleeding , and abortion .
Curettage refers to cleaning the walls of the uterus with a curette .
The World Health Organization recommends this procedure , also called " sharp curettage , " only when MVA is unavailable .
From the 15th week of gestation until approximately the 26th , other techniques must be used .
Dilation and evacuation ( D&E ) consists of opening the cervix of the uterus and emptying it using surgical instruments and suction .
Premature labor and delivery can be induced with prostaglandin ; this can be coupled with injecting the amniotic fluid with hypertonic solutions containing saline or urea .
After the 16th week of gestation , abortions can also be induced by intact dilation and extraction ( IDX ) ( also called intrauterine cranial decompression ) , which requires surgical decompression of the fetus 's head before evacuation .
IDX is sometimes called "partial-birth abortion , " which has been federally banned in the United States .
In the third trimester of pregnancy , abortion may be performed by IDX as described above , induction of labor , or by hysterotomy .
Hysterotomy abortion is a procedure similar to a caesarean section and is performed under general anesthesia .
It requires a smaller incision than a caesarean section and is used during later stages of pregnancy .
First-trimester procedures can generally be performed using local anesthesia , while second-trimester methods may require deep sedation or general anesthesia .
Historically , a number of herbs reputed to possess abortifacient properties have been used in folk medicine : tansy , pennyroyal , black cohosh , and the now-extinct silphium ( see history of abortion ) .
The use of herbs in such a manner can cause serious—even lethal—side effects , such as multiple organ failure , and is not recommended by physicians .
Abortion is sometimes attempted by causing trauma to the abdomen .
The degree of force , if severe , can cause serious internal injuries without necessarily succeeding in inducing miscarriage .
In Southeast Asia , there is an ancient tradition of attempting abortion through forceful abdominal massage .
One of the bas reliefs decorating the temple of Angkor Wat in Cambodia depicts a demon performing such an abortion upon a woman who has been sent to the underworld .
Reported methods of unsafe , self-induced abortion include misuse of misoprostol , and insertion of non-surgical implements such as knitting needles and clothes hangers into the uterus .
These methods are rarely seen in developed countries where surgical abortion is legal and available .
The health risks of abortion depend on whether the procedure is performed safely or unsafely .
The World Health Organization defines unsafe abortions as those performed by unskilled individuals , with hazardous equipment , or in unsanitary facilities .
Legal abortions performed in the developed world are among the safest procedures in medicine .
In the US , the risk of maternal death from abortion is 0.6 per 100,000 procedures , making abortion about 14 times safer than childbirth ( 8.8 maternal deaths per 100,000 live births ) .
The risk of abortion-related mortality increases with gestational age , but remains lower than that of childbirth through at least 21 weeks ' gestation .
Vacuum aspiration in the first trimester is the safest method of surgical abortion , and can be performed in a primary care office , abortion clinic , or hospital .
Complications are rare and can include uterine perforation , pelvic infection , and retained products of conception requiring a second procedure to evacuate .
Preventive antibiotics ( such as doxycycline or metronidazole ) are typically given before elective abortion , as they are believed to substantially reduce the risk of postoperative uterine infection .
Complications after second-trimester abortion are similar to those after first-trimester abortion , and depend somewhat on the method chosen .
There is little difference in terms of safety and efficacy between medical abortion using a combined regimen of mifepristone and misoprostol and surgical abortion (vacuum aspiration ) in early first trimester abortions up to 9 weeks gestation .
Medical abortion using the prostaglandin analog misoprostol alone is less effective and more painful than medical abortion using a combined regimen of mifepristone and misoprostol or surgical abortion .
Some purported risks of abortion are promoted primarily by anti-abortion groups , but lack scientific support .
For example , the question of a link between induced abortion and breast cancer has been investigated extensively .
Major medical and scientific bodies ( including the World Health Organization , the US National Cancer Institute , the American Cancer Society , the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists and the American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists ) have concluded that abortion does not cause breast cancer , although such a link continues to be promoted by anti-abortion groups .
Similarly , evidence indicates that induced abortion does not cause mental-health problems .
The American Psychological Association has concluded that a single abortion is not a threat to women 's mental health , and that women are no more likely to have mental-health problems after a first-trimester abortion than after carrying an unwanted pregnancy to term .
Abortions performed after the first trimester because of fetal abnormalities are not thought to cause mental-health problems .
Some proposed negative psychological effects of abortion have been referred to by anti-abortion advocates as a separate condition called "post-abortion syndrome" , which is not recognized by any medical or psychological organization .
Women seeking to terminate their pregnancies sometimes resort to unsafe methods , particularly when access to legal abortion is restricted .
They may attempt to self-abort or rely on another person who does not have proper medical training or access to proper facilities .
This has a tendency to lead to severe complications , such as incomplete abortion , sepsis , hemorrhage , and damage to internal organs .
Unsafe abortions are a major cause of injury and death among women worldwide .
Although data are imprecise , it is estimated that approximately 20 million unsafe abortions are performed annually , with 97 % taking place in developing countries .
Unsafe abortions are believed to result in millions of injuries .
Estimates of deaths vary according to methodology , and have ranged from 37,000 to 70,000 in the past decade ; deaths from unsafe abortion account for around 13 % of all maternal deaths .
The World Health Organization believes that mortality has fallen since the 1990s .
To reduce the number of unsafe abortions , public health organizations have generally advocated emphasizing the legalization of abortion , training of medical personnel , and ensuring access to reproductive-health services .
The legality of abortion is one of the main determinants of its safety .
Countries with restrictive abortion laws have significantly higher rates of unsafe abortion ( and similar overall abortion rates ) compared to those where abortion is legal and available .
For example , the 1996 legalization of abortion in South Africa had an immediate positive impact on the frequency of abortion-related complications , with abortion-related deaths dropping by more than 90 % .
In addition , a lack of access to effective contraception contributes to unsafe abortion .
It has been estimated that the incidence of unsafe abortion could be reduced by up to 75 % ( from 20 million to 5 million annually ) if modern family planning and maternal health services were readily available globally .
Forty percent of the world 's women are able to access therapeutic and elective abortions within gestational limits , while an additional 35 percent have access to legal abortion if they meet certain physical , mental , or socioeconomic criteria .
While maternal mortality seldom results from safe abortions , unsafe abortions result in 70,000 deaths and 5 million disabilities per year .
Complications of unsafe abortion account for approximately an eighth of maternal mortalities worldwide , though this varies by region .
Secondary infertility caused by an unsafe abortion affects an estimated 24 million women .
The rate of unsafe abortions has increased from 44 % to 49 % between 1995 and 2008 .
Health education , access to family planning , and improvements in health care during and after abortion have been proposed to address this phenomenon .
There are two commonly used methods of measuring the incidence of abortion :
The number of abortions performed worldwide has remained stable in recent years , with 41.6 million having been performed in 2003 and 43.8 million having been performed in 2008 .
The abortion rate worldwide was 28 per 1000 women , though it was 24 per 1000 women for developed countries and 29 per 1000 women for developing countries .
The same 2012 study indicated that in 2008 , the estimated abortion percentage of known pregnancies was at 21 % worldwide , with 26 % in developed countries and 20 % in developing countries .
On average , the incidence of abortion is similar in countries with restrictive abortion laws and those with more liberal access to abortion .
However , restrictive abortion laws are associated with increases in the percentage of abortions which are performed unsafely .
The unsafe abortion rate in developing countries is partly attributable to lack of access to modern contraceptives ; according to the Guttmacher Institute , providing access to contraceptives would result in about 14.5 million fewer unsafe abortions and 38,000 fewer deaths from unsafe abortion annually worldwide .
The rate of legal , induced abortion varies extensively worldwide .
According to the report of employees of Guttmacher Institute it ranged from 7 per 1000 women ( Germany and Switzerland ) to 30 per 1000 women ( Estonia ) in countries with complete statistics in 2008 .
The proportion of pregnancies that ended in induced abortion ranged from about 10 % ( Israel , the Neatherlands and Switzerland ) to 30 % ( Estonia ) in the same group , though it might be as high as 36 % in Hungary and Romania , whose statistics were deemed incomplete .
The abortion rate may also be expressed as the average number of abortions a woman has during her reproductive years ; this is referred to as " total abortion rate " ( TAR ) .
Abortion rates also vary depending on the stage of pregnancy and the method practiced .
In 2003 , the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) reported that 26 % of abortions in the United States were known to have been obtained at less than 6 weeks ' gestation , 18 % at 7 weeks , 15 % at 8 weeks , 18 % at 9 through 10 weeks , 9.7 % at 11 through 12 weeks , 6.2 % at 13 through 15 weeks , 4.1 % at 16 through 20 weeks and 1.4 % at more than 21 weeks .
90.9 % of these were classified as having been done by " curettage " ( suction-aspiration , dilation and curettage , dilation and evacuation ) , 7.7 % by "medical " means ( mifepristone ) , 0.4 % by "intrauterine instillation " ( saline or prostaglandin ) , and 1.0 % by "other " ( including hysterotomy and hysterectomy ) .
According to the CDC , due to data collection difficulties the data must be viewed as tentative and some fetal deaths reported beyond 20 weeks may be natural deaths erroneously classified as abortions if the removal of the fetus is accomplished by the same procedure as an induced abortion .
The Guttmacher Institute estimated there were 2,200 intact dilation and extraction procedures in the US during 2000 ; this accounts for 0.17 % of the total number of abortions performed that year .
Similarly , in England and Wales in 2006 , 89 % of terminations occurred at or under 12 weeks , 9 % between 13 to 19 weeks , and 1.5 % at or over 20 weeks .
64 % of those reported were by vacuum aspiration , 6 % by D&E , and 30 % were medical .
Later abortions are more common in China , India , and other developing countries than in developed countries .
The reasons why women have abortions are diverse and vary across the world .
Some abortions are undergone as the result of societal pressures .
These might include the preference for children of a specific sex , disapproval of single or early motherhood , stigmatization of people with disabilities , insufficient economic support for families , lack of access to or rejection of contraceptive methods , or efforts toward population control ( such as China 's one-child policy ) .
These factors can sometimes result in compulsory abortion or sex-selective abortion .
An American study in 2002 concluded that about half of women having abortions were using a form of contraception at the time of becoming pregnant .
Inconsistent use was reported by half of those using condoms and three-quarters of those using the birth-control pill ; 42 % of those using condoms reported failure through slipping or breakage .
The Guttmacher Institute estimated that "most abortions in the United States are obtained by minority women " because minority women "have much higher rates of unintended pregnancy . "
An additional factor is risk to maternal or fetal health , which was cited as the primary reason for abortion in over a third of cases in some countries and as a significant factor in only a single-digit percentage of abortions in other countries .
In the U.S. , the Supreme Court decisions in " Roe vs Wade " and " Doe vs Bolton " : "ruled that the state 's interest in the life of the fetus became compelling only at the point of viability , defined as the point at which the fetus can survive independently of its mother .
Even after the point of viability , the state cannot favor the life of the fetus over the life or health of the pregnant woman .
Under the right of privacy , physicians must be free to use their "medical judgment for the preservation of the life or health of the mother . "
On the same day that the Court decided Roe , it also decided Doe v. Bolton , in which the Court defined health very broadly : " The medical judgment may be exercised in the light of all factors—physical , emotional , psychological , familial , and the woman 's age—relevant to the well-being of the patient .
This allows the attending physician the room he needs to make his best medical judgment . "
The rate of cancer during pregnancy is 0.02–1 % , and in many cases , cancer of the mother leads to consideration of abortion to protect the life of the mother , or in response to the potential damage that may occur to the fetus during treatment .
This is particularly true for cervical cancer , the most common type which occurs in 1 of every 2000-13000 pregnancies , for which initiation of treatment " cannot co-exist with preservation of fetal life (unless neoadjuvant chemotherapy is chosen ) . "
Very early stage cervical cancers ( I and IIa ) may be treated by radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymph node dissection , radiation therapy , or both , while later stages are treated by radiotherapy .
Treatment of breast cancer during pregnancy also involves fetal considerations , because lumpectomy is discouraged in favor of modified radical mastectomy unless late-term pregnancy allows follow-up radiation therapy to be administered after the birth .
Exposure to a single chemotherapy drug is estimated to cause a 7.5–17 % risk of teratogenic effects on the fetus , with higher risks for multiple drug treatments .
Treatment with more than 40 Gy of radiation usually causes spontaneous abortion .
Exposure to much lower doses during the first trimester , especially 8 to 15 weeks of development , can cause intellectual disability or microcephaly , and exposure at this or subsequent stages can cause reduced intrauterine growth and birth weight .
It is possible to greatly reduce exposure to radiation with abdominal shielding , depending on how far the area to be irradiated is from the fetus .
The process of birth itself may also put the mother at risk .
" Vaginal delivery may result in dissemination of neoplastic cells into lymphovascular channels , haemorrhage , cervical laceration and implantation of malignant cells in the episiotomy site , while abdominal delivery may delay the initiation of non-surgical treatment . "
Induced abortion has long history , and can be traced back to civilizations as varied as China under Shennong ( c .
2700 BCE) , Ancient Egypt with its Ebers Papyrus ( c .
1550 BCE) , and the Roman Empire in the time of Juvenal ( c .
There is evidence to suggest that pregnancies were terminated through a number of methods , including the administration of abortifacient herbs , the use of sharpened implements , the application of abdominal pressure , and other techniques .
Some medical scholars and abortion opponents have suggested that the Hippocratic Oath forbade Ancient Greek physicians from performing abortions ; other scholars disagree with this interpretation , and note the medical texts of Hippocratic Corpus contain descriptions of abortive techniques .
Aristotle , in his treatise on government " Politics " ( 350 BCE) , condemns infanticide as a means of population control .
He preferred abortion in such cases , with the restriction "it must be practised on it before it has developed sensation and life ; for the line between lawful and unlawful abortion will be marked by the fact of having sensation and being alive . "
In Christianity , Pope Sixtus V ( 1585–90 ) is noted as the first Pope to declare that abortion is homicide regardless of the stage of pregnancy ; the Catholic Church had previously been divided on whether it believed that abortion was murder , and did not begin vigorously opposing abortion until the 19th century .
Islamic tradition has traditionally permitted abortion until a point in time when Muslims believe the soul enters the fetus , considered by various theologians to be at conception , 40 days after conception , 120 days after conception , or quickening .
However , abortion is largely heavily restricted or forbidden in areas of high Islamic faith such as the Middle East and North Africa .
In Europe and North America , abortion techniques advanced starting in the 17th century .
However , conservatism by most physicians with regards to sexual matters prevented the wide expansion of safe abortion techniques .
Other medical practitioners in addition to some physicians advertised their services , and they were not widely regulated until the 19th century , when the practice was banned in both the United States and the United Kingdom .
Church groups as well as physicians were highly influential in anti-abortion movements .
In the US , abortion was more dangerous than childbirth until about 1930 when incremental improvements in abortion procedures relative to childbirth made abortion safer .
Induced abortion has long been the source of considerable debate , controversy , and activism .
An individual 's position concerning the complex ethical , moral , philosophical , biological , and legal issues which surround abortion is often related to his or her value system .
Opinions of abortion may be described as being a combination of beliefs about abortion 's morality , beliefs about the proper extent of governmental authority in public policy , and beliefs about the rights and responsibilities of the woman seeking to have an abortion .
Religious ethics also has an influence both on personal opinion and on the greater debate over abortion .
In both public and private debate , arguments presented in favor of or against abortion access focus on either the moral permissibility of an induced abortion , or justification of laws permitting or restricting abortion .
Abortion debates , especially pertaining to abortion laws , are often spearheaded by groups advocating one of these two positions .
Anti-abortion groups who favor greater legal restrictions on abortion , including complete prohibition , most often describe themselves as "pro-life " while abortion rights groups who are against such legal restrictions describe themselves as "pro-choice " .
Generally , the former position argues that a human fetus is a human being with a right to live , making abortion morally the same as murder .
The latter position argues that a woman has certain reproductive rights , especially the choice whether or not to carry a pregnancy to term .
Abortion-rights movements advocate for legal access to induced abortion services .
The issue of induced abortion remains divisive in public life , with recurring arguments to liberalize or to restrict access to legal abortion services .
Abortion-rights supporters themselves are frequently divided as to the types of abortion services that should be available and to the circumstances , for example different periods in the pregnancy such as late term abortions , in which access may be restricted .
Religious , moral , and cultural sensibilities continue to influence abortion laws throughout the world .
The right to life , the right to liberty , the right to security of person , and the right to reproductive health are major issues of human rights that are sometimes used as justification for the existence or absence of laws controlling abortion .
In jurisdictions where abortion is legal , certain requirements must often be met before a woman may obtain a safe , legal abortion ( an abortion performed without the woman 's consent is considered feticide ) .
These requirements usually depend on the age of the fetus , often using a trimester-based system to regulate the window of legality .
Some jurisdictions require a waiting period before the procedure , prescribe the distribution of information on fetal development , or require that parents be contacted if their minor daughter requests an abortion .
Other jurisdictions may require that a woman obtain the consent of the fetus ' father before aborting the fetus , that abortion providers inform patients of health risks of the procedure—sometimes including "risks " not supported by the medical literature—and that multiple medical authorities certify that the abortion is either medically or socially necessary .
China , which has a one-child policy , has at times incorporated mandatory abortions as part of their population control strategy .
Many , but not all , of these allow legal abortions in a variety of circumstances .
These circumstances vary based on jurisdiction , but may include whether the pregnancy is a result of rape or incest , the fetus ' development is impaired , the woman 's physical or mental well-being is endangered , or socioeconomic considerations make childbirth a hardship .
In countries where abortion is banned entirely , such as Nicaragua , medical authorities have recorded rises in maternal death directly and indirectly due to pregnancy as well as deaths due to doctors ' fears of prosecution if they treat other gynecological emergencies .
Some countries , such as Bangladesh , that nominally ban abortion , may also support clinics that perform abortions under the guise of menstrual hygiene .
This is also a terminology in traditional medicine .
In places where abortion is illegal or carries heavy social stigma , pregnant women may engage in medical tourism and travel to countries where they can terminate their pregnancies .
Women without the means to travel can resort to providers of illegal abortions or attempt to perform an abortion by themselves .
Emergency contraception is generally available in countries that have not restricted abortion and is also sometimes available in countries that have otherwise banned abortion , such as Chile .
This has caused controversy , as some anti-abortion groups assert that certain forms of emergency contraception are not contraceptives but abortifacients ( See , e.g. , Abortion in the Dominican Republic . )
Sonography and amniocentesis allow parents to determine sex before childbirth .
The development of this technology has led to sex-selective abortion , or the termination of a fetus based on sex .
The selective termination of a female fetus is most common .
Sex-selective abortion is partially responsible for the noticeable disparities between the birth rates of male and female children in some countries .
The preference for male children is reported in many areas of Asia , and abortion used to limit female births has been reported in Taiwan , South Korea , India , and China .
This deviation from the standard birth rates of males and females occurs despite the fact that the country in question may have officially banned sex-selective abortion or even sex-screening .
In China , a historical preference for a male child has been exacerbated by the one-child policy , which was enacted in 1979 .
Many countries have taken legislative steps to reduce the incidence of sex-selective abortion .
At the International Conference on Population and Development in 1994 over 180 states agreed to eliminate " all forms of discrimination against the girl child and the root causes of son preference" , which was also condemned by a PACE resolution in 2011 .
The World Health Organization and UNICEF , along with other United Nations agencies , have found that measures to reduce access to abortion are much less effective at reducing sex-selective abortions than measures to reduce gender inequality .
In a number of cases , abortion providers and these facilities have been subjected to various forms of violence , including murder , attempted murder , kidnapping , stalking , assault , arson , and bombing .
Anti-abortion violence is classified by both governmental and scholarly sources as terrorism .
Only a small fraction of those opposed to abortion commit violence , often rationalizing their actions as justifiable homicide or defense of others , committed in order to protect the lives of fetuses .
Similar rationales are used to justify invasion of privacy and stalking of doctors , clinic workers , and patients , even by police officers .
In the United States , four physicians who performed abortions have been murdered : David Gunn ( 1993 ) , John Britton ( 1994 ) , Barnett Slepian ( 1998 ) , and George Tiller ( 2009 ) .
Also murdered , in the U.S. and Australia , have been other personnel at abortion clinics , including receptionists and security guards such as James Barrett , Shannon Lowney , Lee Ann Nichols , and Robert Sanderson .
Woundings ( e .g. , Garson Romalis ) and attempted murders have also taken place in the United States and Canada .
Hundreds of bombings , arsons , acid attacks , invasions , and incidents of vandalism against abortion providers have occurred .
Notable perpetrators of anti-abortion violence include Eric Robert Rudolph , Scott Roeder , Shelley Shannon , and Paul Jennings Hill , the first person to be executed in the United States for murdering an abortion provider .
Legal protection of access to abortion has been brought into some countries where abortion is legal .
These laws typically seek to protect abortion clinics from obstruction , vandalism , picketing , and other actions , or to protect patients and employees of such facilities from threats and harassment .
One of the earliest known representations of abortion is in a bas relief at Angkor Wat ( c . 1150 ) .
Anti-abortion activist Børre Knudsen was linked to a 1994 art theft as part of an anti-abortion drive in Norway surrounding the 1994 Winter Olympics .
In 2005 , a Swiss gallery removed from a Chinese art collection a piece that had the head of a fetus attached to the body of a bird .
In 2008 , a Yale student caused a stir when she proposed using aborted excretions and the induced abortion itself as a performance art project .
In the 1966 film " Alfie" , after the title character arranges an abortion for a married woman he has impregnated , he is deeply shaken by the sight of the fetus .
" The Cider House Rules " ( novel 1985 , film 1999 ) follows the story of Larch , an orphanage director who is a reluctant abortionist after seeing the consequences of back-alley abortions , and his orphan medical assistant Homer who is against abortion .
Feminist novels such as " Braided Lives " ( 1997 ) by Marge Piercy emphasize the struggles women had in dealing with unsafe abortion in various circumstances prior to legalization .
Physician Susan Wicklund wrote " This Common Secret " ( 2007 ) about how a personal traumatic abortion experience hardened her resolve to provide compassionate care to women who decide to have an abortion .
As Wicklund crisscrosses the West to perform abortions at remote clinics , she tells the stories of women she has treated and the obstacles that she and her family have faced .
In 2009 , Irene Vilar revealed her past abuse and addiction to abortion in " Impossible Motherhood" , where she aborted 15 pregnancies in 17 years .
According to Vilar it was the result of a dark psychological cycle of power , rebellion and societal expectations .
Various options and realities of abortion have been dramatized in film .
In " Riding in Cars with Boys " ( 2001 ) an underage woman carries her pregnancy to term as abortion is not an affordable option , moves in with the father and finds herself involved with drugs , has no opportunities , and questioning if she loves her child .
In " Juno " ( 2007 ) a 16-year-old initially goes to have an abortion but decides to bear the child and allow a wealthy couple to adopt it .
The films " Dirty Dancing " ( 1987 ) and " If These Walls Could Talk " ( 1996 ) explore the availability , affordability and dangers of illegal abortions .
The emotional impact of dealing with an unwanted pregnancy alone is the focus of " Things You Can Tell Just By Looking at Her " ( 2000 ) and " Circle of Friends " ( 1995 ) .
In " The Godfather Part II " ( 1974 ) Kay informed Michael Corleone that she had obtained an abortion without his consent or knowledge .
On the abortion debate , an irresponsible drug addict is used as a pawn in a power struggle between abortion rights and anti-abortion groups in " Citizen Ruth " ( 1996 ) .
The " Law & Order " television episode " Dignity " deals with the trial of a man who killed a late-term abortion doctor ; the storyline was inspired by the assassination of abortion provider George Tiller .
For example , in sheep , it may be caused by crowding through doors , or being chased by dogs .
In cows , abortion may be caused by contagious disease , such as " Brucellosis " or " Campylobacter" , but can often be controlled by vaccination .
Eating pine needles can also induce abortions in cows .
In horses , a fetus may be aborted or resorbed if it has lethal white syndrome ( congenital intestinal aganglionosis ) .
Foal embryos that are homozygous for the dominant white gene ( WW) are theorized to also be aborted or resorbed before birth .
Cats can experience spontaneous abortion for many reasons , including hormonal imbalance .
A combined abortion and spaying is performed on pregnant cats , especially in Trap-Neuter-Return programs , to prevent unwanted kittens from being born .
Female rodents may terminate a pregnancy when exposed to the smell of a male not responsible for the pregnancy , known as the Bruce effect .
Abortion may also be induced in animals , in the context of animal husbandry .
For example , abortion may be induced in mares that have been mated improperly , or that have been purchased by owners who did not realize the mares were pregnant , or that are pregnant with twin foals .
Feticide can occur in horses and zebras due to male harassment of pregnant mares or forced copulation , although the frequency in the wild has been questioned .
Male gray langur monkeys may attack females following male takeover , causing miscarriage .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Sir Alfred Joseph Hitchcock , KBE ( 13 August 1899 – 29 April 1980 ) was an English film director and producer .
Often nicknamed " The Master of Suspense" , he pioneered many techniques in the suspense and psychological thriller genres .
After a successful career in British cinema in both silent films and early talkies , renowned as England 's best director , Hitchcock moved to Hollywood in 1939 and became a US citizen in 1955 .
Over a career spanning more than half a century , Hitchcock fashioned for himself a distinctive and recognisable directorial style .
He pioneered the use of a camera made to move in a way that mimics a person 's gaze , forcing viewers to engage in a form of voyeurism .
He framed shots to maximise anxiety , fear , or empathy , and used innovative film editing .
His stories often feature fugitives on the run from the law alongside "icy blonde " female characters .
Many of Hitchcock 's films have twist endings and thrilling plots featuring depictions of violence , murder , and crime .
Many of the mysteries , however , are used as decoys or " MacGuffins " that serve the film 's themes and the psychological examinations of the characters .
Hitchcock 's films also borrow many themes from psychoanalysis and feature strong sexual overtones .
Through his cameo appearances in his own films , interviews , film trailers , and the television program " Alfred Hitchcock Presents " , he became a cultural icon .
Hitchcock directed more than fifty feature films in a career spanning six decades .
Often regarded as the greatest British filmmaker , he came first in a 2007 poll of film critics in Britain 's " Daily Telegraph" , which said : " Unquestionably the greatest filmmaker to emerge from these islands , Hitchcock did more than any director to shape modern cinema , which would be utterly different without him .
His flair was for narrative , cruelly withholding crucial information ( from his characters and from us ) and engaging the emotions of the audience like no one else . "
The magazine " MovieMaker " has described him as the most influential filmmaker of all time , and he is widely regarded as one of cinema 's most significant artists .
Born on 13 August 1899 in Leytonstone , ( then part of Essex , now part of London ) , England , Hitchcock was the second son and the youngest of three children of William Hitchcock ( 1862–1914 ) , a greengrocer and poulterer , and Emma Jane Hitchcock ( "née " Whelan ; 1863–1942 ) .
Named Alfred after his father 's brother , Hitchcock was brought up as a Roman Catholic and was sent to Salesian College and the Jesuit Classic school St Ignatius ' College in Stamford Hill , London .
His parents were both of half-English and half-Irish ancestry .
He often described a lonely and sheltered childhood worsened by his obesity .
Around age five , according to Hitchcock , he was sent by his father to the local police station with a note asking the officer to lock him away for five minutes as punishment for behaving badly .
This incident not only implanted a lifetime fear of policemen in Hitchcock , but such harsh treatment and wrongful accusations would be found frequently throughout his films .
In the same year , he left St . Ignatius to study at the London County Council School of Engineering and Navigation in Poplar , London .
After leaving , he became a draftsman and advertising designer with a cable company called Henley 's .
During the First World War , Hitchcock was rejected for military service because of his obesity – sometimes thought to have been caused by a glandular condition .
Nevertheless , the young man signed up to a cadet regiment of the Royal Engineers in 1917 .
His military stint was limited : he received theoretical briefings , weekend drills and exercises .
Hitchcock would march around Hyde Park and was required to wear puttees , which he could never master how to wrap around his legs properly .
While working at Henley 's , Hitchcock began to dabble creatively .
After the company 's in-house publication , " The Henley Telegraph" , was founded in 1919 , he often submitted short articles and eventually became one of its most prolific contributors .
His first piece was " Gas " ( 1919 ) , published in the first issue , in which a young woman imagines that she is being assaulted one night in Paris – only for the twist to reveal that it was all just a hallucination in the dentist 's chair , induced by the anaesthetic .
Hitchcock 's second piece was " The Woman 's Part " ( 1919 ) , which involves the conflicted emotions a husband feels as he watches his wife , an actress , perform onstage .
" Sordid " ( 1920 ) surrounds an attempt to buy a sword from an antiques dealer , with another twist ending .
The short story " And There Was No Rainbow " ( 1920 ) was Hitchcock 's first brush with possibly censurable material .
A young man goes out looking for a brothel , only to stumble into the house of his best friend 's girl .
" What 's Who ? " ( 1920 ) , while humorous , was also a forerunner to the famous Abbott and Costello " Who 's on First ? " routine .
" The History of Pea Eating " ( 1920 ) was a satirical disquisition on the various attempts people have made over the centuries to eat peas successfully .
His final piece , " Fedora " ( 1921 ) , was his shortest and most enigmatic contribution .
It also gave a strikingly accurate description of his future wife , Alma Reville ( whom he had not yet met ) .
During this period , Hitchcock became intrigued by photography and started working in film production in London , working as a title card designer for the London branch of what would become Paramount Pictures .
In 1920 , he received a full-time position at Islington Studios with its American owner , Famous Players-Lasky , and their British successor , Gainsborough Pictures , designing the titles for silent movies .
His rise from title designer to film director took five years .
Hitchcock 's last collaboration with Graham Cutts led him to Germany in 1924 .
The film " The Blackguard " ( German title " Die Prinzessin und der Geiger" , 1925 ) , directed by Cutts and co-written by Hitchcock , was produced in the Babelsberg Studios in Potsdam near Berlin .
Hitchcock also observed part of the making of F. W. Murnau 's film " The Last Laugh " ( 1924 ) .
He was very impressed with Murnau 's work and later used many techniques for the set design in his own productions .
In a book-length interview with François Truffaut , Hitchcock also said he was influenced by Fritz Lang 's film " Destiny " ( 1921 ) .
He was likewise influenced by other foreign filmmakers whose work he absorbed as one of the earliest members of the " seminal " London Film Society , formed in 1925 .
Hitchcock 's first few films faced a string of bad luck .
His first directing project came in 1922 with the aptly titled " Number 13" .
The production was cancelled because of financial problems ; filmed in London , the few scenes that had been finished at that point have been lost .
In 1925 , Michael Balcon of Gainsborough Pictures gave Hitchcock another opportunity for a directing credit with " The Pleasure Garden " made at UFA Studios in Germany ; the film was a commercial flop .
Next , Hitchcock directed a drama called " The Mountain Eagle " ( possibly released under the title " Fear o ' God " in the United States ) .
In 1926 , Hitchcock 's luck changed with his first thriller , " " , a suspense film about the hunt for a Jack the Ripper type of serial killer in London .
Released in January 1927 , it was a major commercial and critical success in the United Kingdom .
As with many of his earlier works , this film was influenced by Expressionist techniques Hitchcock had witnessed first-hand in Germany .
Some commentators regard this piece as the first truly " Hitchcockian " film , incorporating such themes as the "wrong man " .
Following the success of " The Lodger" , Hitchcock hired a publicist to help strengthen his growing reputation .
On 2 December 1926 , Hitchcock married his assistant director , Alma Reville , at the Brompton Oratory in South Kensington , London .
Their only child , daughter Patricia , was born on 7 July 1928 .
Alma was to become Hitchcock 's closest collaborator , but her contributions to his films ( some of which were credited on screen ) Hitchcock would discuss only in private , as she was keen to avoid public attention .
In 1929 , Hitchcock began work on his tenth film " Blackmail" .
While the film was still in production , the studio , British International Pictures ( BIP) , decided to convert it to sound .
As an early " , the film is often cited by film historians as a landmark film , and is often considered to be the first British sound feature film .
With the climax of the film taking place on the dome of the British Museum , " Blackmail " began the Hitchcock tradition of using famous landmarks as a backdrop for suspense sequences .
It also features one of his longest cameo appearances , which shows him being bothered by a small boy as he reads a book on the London Underground .
In the PBS series " The Men Who Made The Movies " , Hitchcock explained how he used early sound recording as a special element of the film , stressing the word "knife " in a conversation with the woman suspected of murder .
During this period , Hitchcock directed segments for a BIP musical film revue " Elstree Calling " ( 1930 ) and directed a short film featuring two " Film Weekly " scholarship winners , " An Elastic Affair " ( 1930 ) .
Another BIP musical revue , " Harmony Heaven " ( 1929 ) , reportedly had minor input from Hitchcock , but his name does not appear in the credits .
In 1933 , Hitchcock was once again working for Michael Balcon at Gaumont-British Picture Corporation .
His first film for the company , " The Man Who Knew Too Much " ( 1934) , was a success and his second , " The 39 Steps " ( 1935 ) , is often considered one of the best films from his early period with the British Film Institute ranking it the fourth best British film of the 20th century .
Already acclaimed in Britain , the success of the film made Hitchcock a star in the US , and established the quintessential English ' Hitchcock blonde ' Madeleine Carroll as the template for his succession of ice cold and elegant leading ladies .
This film was also one of the first to introduce the " MacGuffin" .
In " The 39 Steps" , the MacGuffin is a stolen set of design plans .
There are two men sitting in a train going to Scotland and one man says to the other , " Excuse me , sir , but what is that strange parcel you have on the luggage rack above you ?" ,
The other answers , " It 's an apparatus for trapping lions in the Scottish Highlands ." ,
" But" , says the first man , " there are no lions in the Scottish Highlands ." ,
" Well" , says the other , " then that 's no Macguffin . "
Hitchcock 's next major success was his 1938 film " The Lady Vanishes " , a fast-paced film about the search for a kindly old Englishwoman Miss Froy ( Dame May Whitty ) , who disappears while on board a train in the fictional country of Bandrika .
By 1938 , Hitchcock had become known for his alleged observation , " Actors are cattle " .
He once said that he first made this remark as early as the late 1920s , in connection to stage actors who were snobbish about motion pictures .
However , Michael Redgrave said that Hitchcock had made the statement during the filming of " The Lady Vanishes " .
The phrase would haunt Hitchcock for years to come .
During the filming of his 1941 production of " Mr.
& Mrs. Smith" , Carole Lombard brought some heifers onto the set with name tags of Lombard , Robert Montgomery , and Gene Raymond , the stars of the film , to surprise the director .
Hitchcock said he was misquoted : " I said 'Actors should be " treated " like cattle ' . "
Lauded in Britain where he was dubbed " Alfred the Great " by " Picturegoer " magazine , by the end of the 1930s Hitchcock 's reputation was beginning to soar overseas , with a " New York Times " feature writer stating ; " Three unique and valuable institutions the British have that we in America have not .
Magna Carta , the Tower Bridge and Alfred Hitchcock , the greatest director of screen melodramas in the world . "
" Variety " magazine referred to him as , "probably the best native director in England . "
David O. Selznick signed Hitchcock to a seven-year contract beginning in March 1939 , and the Hitchcocks moved to Hollywood .
In Hollywood , the suspense and the gallows humour that had become Hitchcock 's trademark in film continued to appear in his productions .
The working arrangements with Selznick were less than ideal .
Selznick suffered from constant money problems , and Hitchcock was often displeased with Selznick 's creative control over his films .
In a later interview , Hitchcock summarised the working relationship thus :
Selznick lent Hitchcock to the larger studios more often than producing Hitchcock 's films himself .
In addition , Selznick , as well as fellow independent producer Samuel Goldwyn , made only a few films each year , so he did not always have projects for Hitchcock to direct .
Goldwyn had also negotiated with Hitchcock on a possible contract , only to be outbid by Selznick .
Hitchcock was quickly impressed with the superior resources of the American studios compared with the financial limits he had often faced in England .
With the prestigious Selznick picture " Rebecca " in 1940 , Hitchcock made his first American movie , set in a Hollywood version of England 's West Country and based on a novel by English author Daphne du Maurier .
The film starred Laurence Olivier and Joan Fontaine .
The story concerns a naïve ( and unnamed ) young woman who marries a widowed aristocrat .
She goes to live in his huge English country house , and struggles with the lingering reputation of the elegant and worldly first wife , whose name was Rebecca , and who died under mysterious circumstances .
The film won the Academy Award for Best Picture of 1940 .
The statuette was given to Selznick , as the film 's producer .
Hitchcock was nominated for the Best Director award , his first of five such nominations , but did not win .
There were additional problems between Selznick and Hitchcock , with Selznick known to impose restrictive rules on Hitchcock .
At the same time , Selznick complained about Hitchcock 's "goddamn jigsaw cutting" , which meant that the producer did not have nearly the leeway to create his own film as he liked , but had to follow Hitchcock 's vision of the finished product .
" Rebecca " was the fourth longest of Hitchcock 's films , at 130 minutes , exceeded only by " The Paradine Case " ( 132 minutes ) , " North by Northwest " ( 136 minutes ) , and " Topaz " ( 142 minutes ) .
Hitchcock 's second American film , the European-set thriller " Foreign Correspondent " ( 1940 ) , based on Vincent Sheean 's " Personal History " and produced by Walter Wanger , was nominated for Best Picture that year .
Hitchcock and other British subjects felt uneasy living and working in Hollywood while their country was at war ; his concern resulted in a film that overtly supported the British war effort .
The movie was filmed in the first year of the Second World War and was inspired by the rapidly changing events in Europe , as fictionally covered by an American newspaper reporter portrayed by Joel McCrea .
The film mixed footage of European scenes with scenes filmed on a Hollywood back lot .
The film avoided direct references to Nazism , Germany , and Germans to comply with Hollywood 's Production Code censorship .
Hitchcock 's films during the 1940s were diverse , ranging from the romantic comedy " Mr.
& Mrs. Smith " ( 1941 ) to the courtroom drama " The Paradine Case " ( 1947 ) to the dark and disturbing film noir " Shadow of a Doubt " ( 1943 ) .
In September 1940 , the Hitchcocks bought the Cornwall Ranch near Scotts Valley in the Santa Cruz Mountains .
The ranch became the primary residence of the Hitchcocks for the rest of their lives , although they kept their Bel Air home .
" Suspicion " ( 1941 ) marked Hitchcock 's first film as a producer as well as director .
The film was set in England , and Hitchcock used the north coast of Santa Cruz , California , for the English coastline sequence .
This film was to be actor Cary Grant 's first time working with Hitchcock , and it was one of the few times that Grant would be cast in a sinister role .
Joan Fontaine won Best Actress Oscar for her "outstanding performance in " Suspicion " " .
Grant plays an irresponsible English con man whose actions raise suspicion and anxiety in his shy young English wife ( Fontaine ) .
In a notable scene , Hitchcock uses a lightbulb to illuminate what might be a fatal glass of milk that Grant is bringing to his wife .
In the book the movie is based on ( " Before the Fact " by Francis Iles ) , the Grant character is a killer , but Hitchcock and the studio felt Grant 's image would be tarnished by that ending .
Though a homicide would have suited him better , as he stated to François Truffaut , Hitchcock settled for an ambiguous finale .
" Saboteur " ( 1942 ) was the first of two films that Hitchcock made for Universal , a studio where he would continue his career during his later years .
Hitchcock was forced to use Universal contract players Robert Cummings and Priscilla Lane , both known for their work in comedies and light dramas .
Breaking with Hollywood conventions of the time , Hitchcock did extensive location filming , especially in New York City , and depicted a confrontation between a suspected saboteur ( Cummings ) and a real saboteur ( Norman Lloyd ) atop the Statue of Liberty .
That year he also directed " Have You Heard ? " , a photographic dramatisation of the dangers of rumours during wartime , for " Life " magazine .
" Shadow of a Doubt " ( 1943 ) , Hitchcock 's personal favourite of all his films and the second of the early Universal films , was about young Charlotte " Charlie " Newton ( Teresa Wright ) , who suspects her beloved uncle Charlie Oakley ( Joseph Cotten ) of being a serial murderer .
Hitchcock again filmed extensively on location , this time in the Northern California city of Santa Rosa , during the summer of 1942 .
The director showcased his personal fascination with crime and criminals when he had two of his characters discuss various ways of killing people , to the obvious annoyance of Charlotte .
Working at 20th Century Fox , Hitchcock adapted a script of John Steinbeck 's that recorded the experiences of the survivors of a German U-boat attack in the film " Lifeboat " ( 1944 ) .
The action sequences were shot in a small boat in the studio water tank .
The locale also posed problems for Hitchcock 's traditional cameo appearance .
That was solved by having Hitchcock 's image appear in a newspaper that William Bendix is reading in the boat , showing the director in a before-and-after advertisement for " Reduco-Obesity Slayer " .
While at Fox , Hitchcock seriously considered directing the film version of A. J. Cronin 's novel about a Catholic priest in China , " The Keys of the Kingdom" , but the plans for this fell through .
John M. Stahl ended up directing the 1944 film , which was produced by Joseph L. Mankiewicz and starred Gregory Peck , among other luminaries .
Returning to England for an extended visit in late 1943 and early 1944 , Hitchcock made two short films for the British Ministry of Information , " Bon Voyage " and " Aventure Malgache" .
The two British propaganda films made for the Free French , were the only films Hitchcock made in the French language , and "feature typical Hitchcockian touches " .
In the 1990s , the two films were shown by Turner Classic Movies and released on home video .
In 1945 , Hitchcock served as " treatment advisor " ( in effect , a film editor ) for a Holocaust documentary produced by the British Army .
The film , which recorded the liberation of Nazi concentration camps , remained unreleased until 1985 , when it was completed by PBS Frontline and distributed under the title " Memory of the Camps " .
Hitchcock worked for Selznick again when he directed " Spellbound " ( 1945 ) , which explored psychoanalysis and featured a dream sequence designed by Salvador Dalí .
Gregory Peck plays amnesiac Dr. Anthony Edwardes under the treatment of analyst Dr. Peterson ( Ingrid Bergman ) , who falls in love with him while trying to unlock his repressed past .
The dream sequence as it appears in the film is ten minutes shorter than was originally envisioned , having been edited by Selznick to make it "play " more effectively .
Two point-of-view shots were achieved by building a large wooden hand ( which would appear to belong to the character whose point of view the camera took ) and out-sized props for it to hold : a bucket-sized glass of milk and a large wooden gun .
For added novelty and impact , the climactic gunshot was hand-coloured red on ( some copies of ) the black-and-white film .
Some of the original musical score by Miklós Rózsa ( which makes use of the theremin ) was later adapted by the composer into a concert piano concerto .
According to Hitchcock , in his book-length interview with François Truffaut , Selznick sold the director , the two stars ( Grant and Bergman ) and the screenplay ( by Ben Hecht ) to RKO Radio Pictures as a "package " for $ 500,000 due to cost overruns on Selznick 's " Duel in the Sun " ( 1946 ) .
" Notorious " starred Hitchcock regulars Ingrid Bergman and Cary Grant , and features a plot about Nazis , uranium , and South America .
It was a huge box office success and has remained one of Hitchcock 's most acclaimed films .
His prescient use of uranium as a plot device led to Hitchcock 's being briefly under FBI surveillance .
McGilligan writes that Hitchcock consulted Dr. Robert Millikan of Caltech about the development of an atomic bomb .
Selznick complained that the notion was "science fiction" , only to be confronted by the news stories of the detonation of two atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in Japan in August 1945 .
After completing his final film for Selznick , " The Paradine Case " ( a courtroom drama that critics found lost momentum because it apparently ran too long and exhausted its resource of ideas ) , Hitchcock filmed his first colour film , " Rope " ( 1948 ) .
Here Hitchcock experimented with marshaling suspense in a confined environment , as he had done earlier with " Lifeboat " ( 1943 ) .
Appearing to have been shot in a single take , " Rope " was actually shot in 10 takes ranging from four and a half to 10 minutes each ; a 10-minute length of film being the maximum a camera 's film magazine could hold at the time .
Some transitions between reels were hidden by having a dark object fill the entire screen for a moment .
Hitchcock used those points to hide the cut , and began the next take with the camera in the same place .
Featuring James Stewart in the leading role , " Rope " was the first of four films Stewart would make with Hitchcock .
It was based on the Leopold and Loeb case of the 1920s .
Somehow Hitchcock 's cameraman managed to move the bulky , heavy Technicolor camera quickly around the set as it followed the continuous action of the long takes .
" Under Capricorn " ( 1949 ) , set in nineteenth-century Australia , also used the short-lived technique of long takes , but to a more limited extent .
He again used Technicolor in this production , then returned to black-and-white films for several years .
For " Rope " and " Under Capricorn" , Hitchcock formed a production company with Sidney Bernstein called Transatlantic Pictures , which became inactive after these two unsuccessful pictures .
Hitchcock continued to produce his own films for the rest of his life .
Hitchcock filmed " Stage Fright " ( 1950 ) in the UK.
For the first time , he matched one of Warner Bros. ' most popular stars , Jane Wyman , with the sultry German actress Marlene Dietrich .
Hitchcock used several prominent British actors , including Michael Wilding , Richard Todd , and Alastair Sim .
This was Hitchcock 's first production for Warner Bros. , which had distributed " Rope " and " Under Capricorn" , because Transatlantic Pictures was experiencing financial difficulties .
With the film " Strangers on a Train " ( 1951 ) , based on the novel by Patricia Highsmith , Hitchcock combined many elements from his preceding films .
He approached Dashiell Hammett to write the dialogue but Raymond Chandler took over , then left over disagreements with the director .
Two men casually meet , one of whom speculates on a foolproof murder technique .
He suggests that two people , each wishing to do away with someone , should each perform the other 's murder .
Farley Granger 's role was as the innocent victim of the scheme , while Robert Walker , previously known for "boy-next-door " roles , played the villain .
MCA head Lew Wasserman , whose client list included James Stewart , Janet Leigh and other actors who would appear in Hitchcock 's films , had a significant impact in packaging and marketing Hitchcock 's films beginning in the 1950s .
After " I Confess " ( 1953 ) with Montgomery Clift , three popular films starring Grace Kelly followed .
" Dial M for Murder " ( 1954 ) was adapted from the stage play by Frederick Knott .
Ray Milland plays the scheming villain , an ex-tennis pro who tries to murder his unfaithful wife Grace Kelly for her money .
When she kills the hired assassin in self-defense , Milland manipulates the evidence to make it look like a premeditated murder by his wife .
Her lover , Mark Halliday ( Robert Cummings ) , and Police Inspector Hubbard ( John Williams ) , work urgently to save her from execution .
With " Dial M , " Hitchcock experimented with 3D cinematography .
The public was growing weary of the gimmick by the time of the film 's release , however , and it was shown in 3D only in a few first-run engagements .
The 3D version has been revived occasionally , including a brief reissue in some major US cities in the 1980s .
The film marked a return to color productions for Hitchcock .
Hitchcock then moved to Paramount Pictures and filmed " Rear Window " ( 1954) , starring James Stewart and Kelly again , as well as Thelma Ritter and Raymond Burr .
Stewart 's character , a photographer based on Robert Capa , must temporarily use a wheelchair ; out of boredom he begins observing his neighbours across the courtyard , and becomes convinced one of them ( Raymond Burr ) has murdered his wife .
Stewart tries to sway both his glamorous model-girlfriend ( Kelly ) , whom screenwriter John Michael Hayes based on his own wife , and his policeman buddy ( Wendell Corey ) to his theory , and eventually succeeds .
As with " Lifeboat " and " Rope" , the principal characters were almost entirely confined to a small space , in this case Stewart 's tiny studio apartment overlooking a massive courtyard .
Hitchcock used close-ups of Stewart 's face to show his character 's reactions to all he sees , "from the comic voyeurism directed at his neighbours to his helpless terror watching Kelly and Burr in the villain 's apartment " .
In 1955 , Hitchcock became a United States citizen .
His third Kelly film , " To Catch a Thief " ( 1955 ) , set in the French Riviera , paired her with Cary Grant .
He plays retired thief John Robie , who becomes the prime suspect for a spate of robberies in the Riviera .
A thrill-seeking American heiress played by Kelly surmises his true identity and tries to seduce him .
" Despite the obvious age disparity between Grant and Kelly and a lightweight plot , the witty script ( loaded with double entendres ) and the good-natured acting proved a commercial success . "
She married Prince Rainier of Monaco in 1956 , and the residents of her new land were against her making any more films .
Hitchcock successfully remade his own 1934 film " The Man Who Knew Too Much " in 1956 .
This time , the film starred Stewart and Doris Day , who sang the theme song , " Que Sera , Sera ( Whatever Will Be , Will Be )" , which won the Oscar for Best Original Song and became a big hit for her .
They play a couple whose son is kidnapped to prevent them from interfering with an assassination .
As in the 1934 film , the climax takes place at the Royal Albert Hall , London .
" The Wrong Man " ( 1957 ) , Hitchcock 's final film for Warner Bros. , was a low-key black-and-white production based on a real-life case of mistaken identity reported in Life Magazine in 1953 .
This was the only film of Hitchcock 's to star Henry Fonda .
Fonda plays a Stork Club musician mistaken for a liquor store thief who is arrested and tried for robbery while his wife ( newcomer Vera Miles ) emotionally collapses under the strain .
Hitchcock told Truffaut that his lifelong fear of the police attracted him to the subject and was embedded in many scenes .
" Vertigo " ( 1958 ) again starred Stewart , this time with Kim Novak and Barbara Bel Geddes .
Stewart plays " Scottie" , a former police investigator suffering from acrophobia , who develops an obsession with a woman he is shadowing ( Novak ) .
Scottie 's obsession leads to tragedy , and this time Hitchcock does not opt for a happy ending .
The film contains a camera technique developed by Irmin Roberts that has been copied many times by filmmakers , wherein the image appears to " stretch" .
This is achieved by moving the camera in the opposite direction of the camera 's zoom .
It has become known by many nicknames , including Dolly zoom , " Zolly , " " Hitchcock Zoom , " and " Vertigo Effect . "
Although the film is widely considered a classic today , " Vertigo " met with negative reviews and poor box office receipts upon its release , and was the last collaboration between Stewart and Hitchcock .
Although ranked second ( behind " Citizen Kane " ) for almost 50 years the film was voted top by critics in the 2012 " Sight & Sound " decade poll .
It was premiered in the San Sebastián International Film Festival , where Hitchcock won a Silver Seashell .
By this time , Hitchcock had filmed in many areas of the United States .
He followed " Vertigo " with three more successful films .
Two are also recognised as among his best movies : " North by Northwest " ( 1959 ) and " Psycho " ( 1960 ) .
In " North by Northwest" , Cary Grant portrays Roger Thornhill , a Madison Avenue advertising executive who is mistaken for a government secret agent .
He is hotly pursued across the United States by enemy agents , apparently one of them being Eve Kendall ( Eva Marie Saint ) , in fact working undercover .
Produced on a constrained budget of $ 800,000 , it was shot in black-and-white on a spare set using crew members from his television show " Alfred Hitchcock Presents " .
The unprecedented violence of the shower scene , the early death of the heroine , the innocent lives extinguished by a disturbed murderer became the defining hallmarks of a new horror movie genre and have been copied by many authors of subsequent films .
The public loved the film , with lines stretching outside of theatres as people had to wait for the next showing .
It broke box-office records in China and the rest of Asia , France , Britain , South America , the United States and Canada , and was a moderate success in Australia for a brief period .
It was the most profitable black-and-white sound film ever made , and Hitchcock personally realized well in excess of $ 15 million .
He subsequently swapped his rights to " Psycho " and his TV anthology for 150,000 shares of MCA , making him the third largest shareholder in MCA Inc. and his own boss at Universal , in theory at least .
But that did not stop them from interfering with him .
" Psycho " was the most profitable film of Hitchcock 's career , earning $ 15 million by the end of the first year .
Hitchcock 's second most profitable was " Family Plot" , earning $ 7.5 million , and third place was a tie between " Torn Curtain " ( 1966 ) and " Frenzy " ( 1972 ) , each earning $ 6.5 million .
" The Birds " , inspired by a Daphne du Maurier short story and by a news story about a mysterious infestation of birds in Santa Cruz , California , was Hitchcock 's 49th film .
Newcomer Tippi Hedren made her screen debut in the film , co-starring Rod Taylor and Suzanne Pleshette .
The scenes of the birds attacking included hundreds of shots mixing live and animated sequences .
The cause of the birds ' attack is left unanswered , "perhaps highlighting the mystery of forces unknown " .
Hitchcock cast Hedren again opposite Sean Connery in his next film , " Marnie" , a romantic drama and psychological thriller .
Decades later , Hedren called Hitchcock a misogynist and said that Hitchcock effectively ended her career by keeping her to an exclusive contract for two years when she rebuffed his sexual advances .
In 2012 , Hedren described Hitchcock as a " sad character " ; a man of "unusual genius" , yet "evil , and deviant , almost to the point of dangerous , because of the effect that he could have on people that were totally unsuspecting . "
In response , a " Daily Telegraph " article quoted several actresses who had worked with Hitchcock , including Eva Marie Saint , Doris Day and Kim Novak , none of whom shared Hedren 's opinion about him .
Novak , who worked on Hitchcock 's " Vertigo" , told the " Telegraph " " I never saw him make a pass at anybody or act strange to anybody . "
" Psycho " and " The Birds " had unconventional soundtracks : the screeching strings played in the murder scene in " Psycho " were unusually dissonant , and " The Birds " dispensed with any conventional score , instead using a new technique of electronically produced sound effects .
Bernard Herrmann composed the former and was a consultant on the latter .
Failing health reduced Hitchcock 's output during the last two decades of his career .
Biographer Stephen Rebello claimed Universal "forced " two movies on him , " Torn Curtain " and " Topaz" .
Both were spy thrillers set with Cold War-related themes .
The first , " Torn Curtain " ( 1966 ) , with Paul Newman and Julie Andrews , precipitated the bitter end of the twelve-year collaboration between Hitchcock and composer Bernard Herrmann .
Herrmann was fired when Hitchcock was unsatisfied with his score .
" Topaz " ( 1969 ) , based on a Leon Uris novel , is partly set in Cuba .
In 1972 , Hitchcock returned to England to film his penultimate film " Frenzy" .
After two only moderately successful espionage films , the plot marks a return to the murder thriller genre of earlier in his career , and is based upon the novel " Goodbye Piccadilly , Farewell Leicester Square " .
The plot centres on a serial killer in contemporary London .
In a very early scene there is dialogue that mentions two actual London serial murder cases : the Christie murders in the early 1950s , and the Jack the Ripper murders in 1888 .
The basic story recycles his early film " The Lodger " .
Richard Blaney ( Jon Finch ) , a volatile barkeeper with a history of explosive anger , becomes the prime suspect for the " Necktie Murders , " which are actually committed by his friend Bob Rusk ( Barry Foster ) .
This time , Hitchcock makes the victim and villain kindreds , rather than opposites , as in " Strangers on a Train" .
Only one of them , however , has crossed the line to murder .
For the first time , Hitchcock allowed nudity and profane language , which had previously been taboo , in one of his films .
He also shows rare sympathy for the chief inspector and his comic domestic life .
Biographers have noted that Hitchcock had always pushed the limits of film censorship , often managing to fool Joseph Breen , the longtime head of Hollywood 's Production Code .
Many times Hitchcock slipped in subtle hints of improprieties forbidden by censorship until the mid-1960s .
Yet Patrick McGilligan wrote that Breen and others often realised that Hitchcock was inserting such things and were actually amused as well as alarmed by Hitchcock 's "inescapable inferences " .
Beginning with " Torn Curtain" , Hitchcock was finally able to blatantly include plot elements previously forbidden in American films and this continued for the remainder of his film career .
It relates the escapades of " Madam " Blanche Tyler , played by Barbara Harris , a fraudulent spiritualist , and her taxi driver lover Bruce Dern , making a living from her phony powers .
William Devane , Karen Black and Cathleen Nesbitt co-starred .
It is the only Hitchcock film scored by John Williams .
Based on the Victor Canning novel " The Rainbird Pattern" , the novel 's tone is more sinister and dark than what Hitchcock wanted for the film .
Screenwriter Ernest Lehman originally wrote the film with a dark tone but was pushed to a lighter , more comical tone by Hitchcock .
The film went through various titles including " Deceit " and " Missing Heir" .
It was changed to " Family Plot " at the suggestion of the studio .
Near the end of his life , Hitchcock had worked on the script for a projected spy thriller , " The Short Night " , collaborating with screenwriters James Costigan and Ernest Lehman .
Despite some preliminary work , the story was never filmed .
This was caused primarily by Hitchcock 's own failing health and his concerns over the health of his wife , Alma , who had suffered a stroke .
The script was eventually published posthumously , in a book on Hitchcock 's last years .
Hitchcock died at age 80 in his Bel Air home of renal failure at 9:17 am on 29 April 1980 .
While biographer Spoto wrote that Hitchcock "rejected suggestions that he allow a priest ... to come for a visit , or celebrate a quiet , informal ritual at the house for his comfort , " Jesuit priest Mark Henninger wrote that he and fellow priest Tom Sullivan celebrated Mass at the filmmaker 's home ; Father Sullivan heard Hitchcock 's confession .
He was survived by his wife and their daughter .
Hitchcock 's funeral Mass was held at Good Shepherd Catholic Church in Beverly Hills , after which his body was cremated and his remains were scattered over the Pacific Ocean .
Hitchcock appeared briefly in most of his own films .
For example , he is seen struggling to get a double bass onto a train ( " Strangers on a Train " ) , or walking dogs out of a pet shop ( " The Birds " ) , as a shadow ( " Family Plot " ) , sitting at a table in a photograph ( " Dial M for Murder " ) and misses the bus ( " North by Northwest " ) .
Hitchcock returned several times to cinematic devices such as suspense , the audience as voyeur , and his well-known " MacGuffin , " a plot device that is essential to the characters on the screen , but is irrelevant to the audience .
Thus , the MacGuffin was always hazily described ( in " North By Northwest , " Leo G. Carroll describes James Mason as an "importer-exporter . " )
A central theme of Hitchcock 's films was murder and the psychology behind it .
Hitchcock 's films sometimes feature characters struggling in their relationships with their mothers .
In " North by Northwest " ( 1959 ) , Roger Thornhill ( Cary Grant 's character ) is an innocent man ridiculed by his mother for insisting that shadowy , murderous men are after him .
In " The Birds " ( 1963 ) , the Rod Taylor character , an innocent man , finds his world under attack by vicious birds , and struggles to free himself of a clinging mother ( Jessica Tandy ) .
The killer in " Frenzy " ( 1972 ) has a loathing of women but idolises his mother .
The villain Bruno in " Strangers on a Train " hates his father , but has an incredibly close relationship with his mother ( played by Marion Lorne ) .
Sebastian ( Claude Rains ) in " Notorious " has a clearly conflictual relationship with his mother , who is ( correctly ) suspicious of his new bride Alicia Huberman ( Ingrid Bergman ) .
Norman Bates has troubles with his mother in " Psycho" .
The famous victims in " The Lodger " are all blondes .
In " The 39 Steps" , Hitchcock 's glamorous blonde star , Madeleine Carroll , is put in handcuffs .
In " Marnie " ( 1964 ) , the title character ( played by Tippi Hedren ) is a thief .
In " To Catch a Thief " ( 1955 ) , Francie ( Grace Kelly ) offers to help a man she believes is a burglar .
In " Rear Window" , Lisa ( Grace Kelly again ) risks her life by breaking into Lars Thorwald 's apartment .
The best-known example is in " Psycho " where Janet Leigh 's unfortunate character steals $ 40,000 and is murdered by a reclusive psychopath .
Hitchcock 's last blonde heroine was—years after Dany Robin and her "daughter " Claude Jade in " Topaz "—Barbara Harris as a phony psychic turned amateur sleuth in his final film , 1976 's " Family Plot" .
In the same film , the diamond smuggler played by Karen Black could also fit that role , as she wears a long blonde wig in various scenes and becomes increasingly uncomfortable about her line of work .
Some critics and Hitchcock scholars , including Donald Spoto and Roger Ebert , agree that " Vertigo " represents the director 's most personal and revealing film , dealing with the obsessions of a man who crafts a woman into the woman he desires .
" Vertigo " explores more frankly and at greater length his interest in the relation between sex and death than any other film in his filmography .
Hitchcock often said that his favourite film ( of his own work ) was " Shadow of a Doubt " .
Hitchcock once commented , " The writer and I plan out the entire script down to the smallest detail , and when we 're finished all that 's left to do is to shoot the film .
Actually , it 's only when one enters the studio that one enters the area of compromise .
Really , the novelist has the best casting since he does n't have to cope with the actors and all the rest . "
In an interview with Roger Ebert in 1969 , Hitchcock elaborated further :
In " Writing with Hitchcock" , a book-length study of Hitchcock 's working method with his writers , author Steven DeRosa noted that " Although he rarely did any actual 'writing ' , especially on his Hollywood productions , Hitchcock supervised and guided his writers through every draft , insisting on a strict attention to detail and a preference for telling the story through visual rather than verbal means .
While this exasperated some writers , others admitted the director inspired them to do their very best work .
Hitchcock often emphasised that he took no screen credit for the writing of his films .
However , over time the work of many of his writers has been attributed solely to Hitchcock’s creative genius , a misconception he rarely went out of his way to correct .
Notwithstanding his technical brilliance as a director , Hitchcock relied on his writers a great deal . "
Hitchcock 's films were strongly believed to have been extensively storyboarded to the finest detail by the majority of commentators over the years .
He was reported to have never even bothered looking through the viewfinder , since he did not need to , though in publicity photos he was shown doing so .
He also used this as an excuse to never have to change his films from his initial vision .
If a studio asked him to change a film , he would claim that it was already shot in a single way , and that there were no alternate takes to consider .
However , this view of Hitchcock as a director who relied more on pre-production than on the actual production itself has been challenged by the book " Hitchcock at Work" , written by Bill Krohn , the American correspondent of " Cahiers du cinéma" .
Krohn , after investigating several script revisions , notes to other production personnel written by or to Hitchcock alongside inspection of storyboards , and other production material , has observed that Hitchcock 's work often deviated from how the screenplay was written or how the film was originally envisioned .
He noted that the myth of storyboards in relation to Hitchcock , often regurgitated by generations of commentators on his movies , was to a great degree perpetuated by Hitchcock himself or the publicity arm of the studios .
A great example would be the celebrated crop-spraying sequence of " North by Northwest " which was not storyboarded at all .
After the scene was filmed , the publicity department asked Hitchcock to make storyboards to promote the film and Hitchcock in turn hired an artist to match the scenes in detail .
Even when storyboards were made , scenes that were shot differed from them significantly .
Krohn 's extensive analysis of the production of Hitchcock classics like " Notorious " reveals that Hitchcock was flexible enough to change a film 's conception during its production .
Another example Krohn notes is the American remake of " The Man Who Knew Too Much , " whose shooting schedule commenced without a finished script and moreover went over schedule , something that , as Krohn notes , was not an uncommon occurrence on many of Hitchcock 's films , including " Strangers on a Train " and " Topaz" .
While Hitchcock did do a great deal of preparation for all his movies , he was fully cognizant that the actual film-making process often deviated from the best-laid plans and was flexible to adapt to the changes and needs of production as his films were not free from the normal hassles faced and common routines utilized during many other film productions .
Krohn 's work also sheds light on Hitchcock 's practice of generally shooting in chronological order , which he notes sent many films over budget and over schedule and , more importantly , differed from the standard operating procedure of Hollywood in the Studio System Era .
Equally important is Hitchcock 's tendency to shoot alternate takes of scenes .
This differed from coverage in that the films were not necessarily shot from varying angles so as to give the editor options to shape the film how he/she chooses ( often under the producer 's aegis ) .
Rather they represented Hitchcock 's tendency of giving himself options in the editing room , where he would provide advice to his editors after viewing a rough cut of the work .
According to Krohn , this and a great deal of other information revealed through his research of Hitchcock 's personal papers , script revisions and the like refute the notion of Hitchcock as a director who was always in control of his films , whose vision of his films did not change during production , which Krohn notes has remained the central long-standing myth of Alfred Hitchcock .
His fastidiousness and attention to detail also found its way into each film poster for his films .
Hitchcock preferred to work with the best talent of his day—film poster designers such as Bill Gold and Saul Bass—and kept them busy with countless rounds of revision until he felt that the single image of the poster accurately represented his entire film .
Similarly , much of Hitchcock 's supposed dislike of actors has been exaggerated .
Hitchcock simply did not tolerate the method approach , as he believed that actors should only concentrate on their performances and leave work on script and character to the directors and screenwriters .
In a " Sight and Sound " interview , he stated that , 'the method actor is OK in the theatre because he has a free space to move about .
But when it comes to cutting the face and what he sees and so forth , there must be some discipline ' .
He often used the same actors in many of his films .
During the making of " Lifeboat" , Walter Slezak , who played the German character , stated that Hitchcock knew the mechanics of acting better than anyone he knew .
Several critics have observed that despite his reputation as a man who disliked actors , several actors who worked with him gave fine , often brilliant performances and these performances contribute to the film 's success .
As more fully discussed above , in " Inter-War British Career , " actress Dolly Haas , who was a personal friend of Hitchcock 's and who acted for him in the 1953 film " I Confess" , stated that Hitchcock regarded actors as "animated props . "
For Hitchcock , the actors , like the props , were part of the film 's setting , as he said to Truffaut :
In my opinion , the chief requisite for an actor is the ability to do nothing well , which is by no means as easy as it sounds .
He should be willing to be utilised and wholly integrated into the picture by the director and the camera .
He must allow the camera to determine the proper emphasis and the most effective dramatic highlights .
Regarding Hitchcock 's sometimes less than pleasant relationship with actors , there was a persistent rumour that he had said that actors were cattle .
Hitchcock addressed this story in his interview with François Truffaut :
I 'm not quite sure in what context I might have made such a statement .
It may have been made ...when we used actors who were simultaneously performing in stage plays .
When they had a matinee , and I suspected they were allowing themselves plenty of time for a very leisurely lunch .
And this meant that we had to shoot our scenes at breakneck speed so that the actors could get out on time .
I could n't help feeling that if they 'd been really conscientious , they 'd have swallowed their sandwich in the cab , on the way to the theatre , and get there in time to put on their make-up and go on stage .
I had no use for that kind of actor .
Carole Lombard , tweaking Hitchcock and drumming up a little publicity , brought some cows along with her when she reported to the set of " Mr. and Mrs. Smith" .
In the late 1950s , French New Wave critics , especially Éric Rohmer , Claude Chabrol and François Truffaut , were among the first to see and promote Hitchcock 's films as artistic works .
Hitchcock was one of the first directors to whom they applied their auteur theory , which stresses the artistic authority of the director in the film-making process .
Hitchcock 's innovations and vision have influenced a great number of filmmakers , producers , and actors .
His influence helped start a trend for film directors to control artistic aspects of their movies without answering to the movie 's producer .
Hitchcock was a multiple nominee and winner of a number of prestigious awards , receiving two Golden Globes , eight Laurel Awards , and five lifetime achievement awards including the first BAFTA Academy Fellowship Award , as well as being five times nominated for , albeit never winning , an Academy Award as Best Director .
His film " Rebecca " ( nominated for 11 Oscars ) won the Academy Award for Best Picture of 1940—particularly notable as another Hitchcock film , " Foreign Correspondent" , was also nominated that same year .
In addition to these , Hitchcock received a knighthood in 1980 when he was appointed a Knight Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire ( KBE ) by Queen Elizabeth II in the 1980 New Year Honours .
Asked by a reporter why it had taken the Queen so long , Hitchcock quipped , " I suppose it was a matter of carelessness " .
An English Heritage blue plaque , unveiled in 1999 , marks where Sir Alfred Hitchcock lived in London at 153 Cromwell Road , Kensington and Chelsea , SW5 .
In June 2013 , nine restored versions of Hitchcock 's early silent films , including his 1925 directorial debut , " The Pleasure Garden " , were shown at the Brooklyn Academy of Music 's Harvey Theater .
Known as " The Hitchcock 9 , " the traveling tribute was made possible by a $ 3 million program organized by the British Film Institute .
Along with Walt Disney , Hitchcock was among the first prominent motion picture producers to fully envisage just how popular the medium of television would become .
From 1955 to 1965 , Hitchcock was the host and producer of a television series titled " Alfred Hitchcock Presents " .
While his films had made Hitchcock 's name strongly associated with suspense , the TV series made Hitchcock a celebrity himself .
His irony-tinged voice and signature droll delivery , gallows humour , iconic image and mannerisms became instantly recognisable and were often the subject of parody .
The title-sequence of the show pictured a minimalist caricature of Hitchcock 's profile ( he drew it himself ; it is composed of only nine strokes ) , which his real silhouette then filled .
His introductions before the stories in his program always included some sort of wry humour , such as the description of a recent multi-person execution hampered by having only one electric chair , while two are now shown with a sign " Two chairs—no waiting ! " .
He directed 18 episodes of the TV series himself , which aired from 1955 to 1965 in two versions .
It became " The Alfred Hitchcock Hour " in 1962 .
The series used a curious little tune as its title-theme .
" Funeral March of a Marionette" , by the French composer Charles Gounod ( 1818–1893 ) , the composer of the 1859 opera " Faust" , was suggested to him by composer Bernard Herrmann .
Arthur Fiedler and the Boston Pops Orchestra included the piece on one of their extended play 45-rpm discs for RCA Victor during the 1950s .
" Alfred Hitchcock Presents " was parodied by Friz Freleng 's 1961 cartoon " The Last Hungry Cat" , which contains a plot similar to " Blackmail" .
In the 1980s , a new version of " Alfred Hitchcock Presents " was produced for television , making use of Hitchcock 's original introductions in a colourised form .
Hitchcock appears as a character in the popular juvenile detective book series , " Alfred Hitchcock and the Three Investigators " .
The long-running detective series was created by Robert Arthur , who wrote the first several books , although other authors took over after he left the series .
The Three Investigators—Jupiter Jones , Bob Andrews and Peter Crenshaw—were amateur detectives , slightly younger than the Hardy Boys .
In the introduction to each book , " Alfred Hitchcock " introduces the mystery , and he sometimes refers a case to the boys to solve .
At the end of each book , the boys report to Hitchcock , and sometimes give him a memento of their case .
At the height of Hitchcock 's success , he was also asked to introduce a set of books with his name attached .
The series was a collection of short stories by popular short-story writers , primarily focused on suspense and thrillers .
These titles included " Alfred Hitchcock 's Anthology" , " Alfred Hitchcock Presents : Stories to be Read with the Door Locked " , " Alfred Hitchcock 's Monster Museum" , " Alfred Hitchcock 's Supernatural Tales of Terror and Suspense" , " Alfred Hitchcock 's Spellbinders in Suspense" , " Alfred Hitchcock 's Witch 's Brew" , " Alfred Hitchcock 's Ghostly Gallery" , " Alfred Hitchcock 's A Hangman 's Dozen" , " Alfred Hitchcock 's Stories Not For the Nervous " and " Alfred Hitchcock 's Haunted Houseful . "
Hitchcock himself was not actually involved in the reading , reviewing , editing or selection of the short stories ; in fact , even his introductions were ghost-written .
The entire extent of his involvement with the project was to lend his name and collect a check .
Some notable writers whose works were used in the collection include Shirley Jackson ( " Strangers in Town " , " The Lottery " ) , T. H. White ( " The Once and Future King " ) , Robert Bloch , H. G. Wells ( " The War of the Worlds " ) , Robert Louis Stevenson , Sir Arthur Conan Doyle , Mark Twain and the creator of " The Three Investigators " , Robert Arthur .
In a similar manner , Hitchcock 's name was licensed for a digest-sized monthly , " Alfred Hitchcock 's Mystery Magazine" , which has been published since 1956 .
Hitchcock also wrote a mystery story for " Look " magazine in 1943 , " The Murder of Monty Woolley " .
This was a sequence of captioned photographs inviting the reader to inspect the pictures for clues to the murderer 's identity ; Hitchcock cast the performers as themselves , such as Woolley , Doris Merrick and make-up man Guy Pearce , whom Hitchcock identified , in the last photo , as the murderer .
The article was reprinted in " Games " Magazine in November/December 1980 .
In September 2010 , BBC Radio 7 broadcast a series of five fifteen-minute programs entitled " The Late Alfred Hitchcock Presents " with Michael Roberts impersonating Alfred Hitchcock for introductory/concluding comments and reading the stories in his own voice .
These five stories were originally intended for the television series , but were rejected because of their rather gruesome nature :
Keith Staskiewicz wrote in " Entertainment Weekly " about the 2012 films , " ...Hitchcock was depicted in his twin biopics as either a charming but troubled genius or a monstrous sexual obsessive .. . "
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Aberdeenshire ( ) is one of the 32 council areas of Scotland , and a lieutenancy area .
The Aberdeenshire council area does not include the City of Aberdeen , a separate council area , from which its name derives .
Together , the modern council area and the city form historic Aberdeenshire , one of the counties of Scotland formerly used for local government and still used as a registration county .
Aberdeenshire Council is headquartered at Woodhill House , in Aberdeen , making it the only Scottish council whose headquarters are based outwith its jurisdiction .
Aberdeenshire borders Angus and Perth and Kinross to the south , and Highland and Moray to the west .
Traditionally , it has been economically dependent upon the primary sector ( agriculture , fishing , and forestry ) and related
Over the last 40 years , the development of the oil and gas industry and associated service sector has broadened Aberdeenshire 's economic base , and contributed to a rapid population growth of some 50 % .
since 1975 , while the land covered represents 8 % of Scotland 's overall territory .
Aberdeenshire has a rich prehistoric and historic heritage .
It is the locus of a large number of Neolithic and Bronze Age archaeological sites , including Longman Hill , Kempstone Hill , Catto Long Barrow and Cairn Lee .
The area was settled in the Bronze Age by the Beaker culture , who arrived from the south around 2000-1800 BC .
Stone circles and cairns are predominantly from this era .
In the Iron Age , hill forts were built .
Around the 1st century AD , the Taexali people , which have left little history were believed to have resided along the coast .
The Picts were the next documented inhabitants of the area , and were no later than 800-900 AD.
The Romans also were in the area during this period , as they left signs at Kintore .
Christianity influenced the inhabitants early on , and there were Celtic monasteries at Old Deer and Monymusk .
Since medieval times there have been a number of crossings of the Mounth ( a spur of mountainous land that extends from the higher inland range to the North Sea slightly north of Stonehaven ) through present day Aberdeenshire from the Scottish Lowlands to the Highlands .
Some of the most well known and historically important trackways are the Causey Mounth and Elsick Mounth .
Aberdeenshire played an important role in the fighting between the Scottish clans .
Clan MacBeth and Clan Canmore were 2 of the larger clans .
During the Anglo-Norman penetration , other families arrives such as House of Balliol , Clan Bruce , and Clan Cumming ( Comyn ) .
When the fighting amongst these newcomers resulted in the Scottish Wars of Independence , the English king Edward I traveled across the area twice , in 1296 and 1303 .
In 1307 , Robert the Bruce was victorious near Inverurie .
Along with his victory came new families , namely the Forbeses and the Gordons .
These new families set the stage for the upcoming rivalries during the 14th and 15th centuries .
This rivalry grew worse when religion became a focal point , as the Gordon family adhered to Catholicism and the Forbes to Protestantism .
Three universities were founded in the area prior to the 17th century , King 's College in Old Aberdeen ( 1494 ) , Marischal College in Aberdeen ( 1593 ) , and the University of Fraserburgh ( 1597 ) .
After the end of the Revolution of 1688 , there was a peaceful period , interrupted by minor events such as the Rising of 1715 and the Rising of 1745 , which in turn lead to the end of the ascendancy of Episcopalianism , and the feudal power of landowners and in turn lead to the era of increased agricultural and industrial progress .
During the 17th century , Aberdeenshire was the location of more fighting , centered around the Marquess of Montrose and the English Civil Wars .
This period also saw increased wealth due to the increase in trade with Germany , Poland , and the Low Countries .
The present council area is named after the historic county of Aberdeen , which had different boundaries and was abolished in 1975 under the Local Government ( Scotland ) Act 1973 .
It was replaced by Grampian Regional Council and five district councils : Banff and Buchan , Gordon , Kincardine and Deeside , Moray and the City of Aberdeen .
The current Aberdeenshire consists of all of former Aberdeenshire , former Kincardineshire and the northeast portions of Banffshire .
Local government functions were shared between the two levels .
In 1996 , under the Local Government etc ( Scotland ) Act 1994 , the Banff and Buchan district , Gordon district and Kincardine and Deeside district were merged to form the present Aberdeenshire council area , with the other two districts becoming autonomous council areas .
The population of the council area has risen over 50 % since 1971 to approximately 247,600 , representing 4.7 % of Scotland 's total .
Aberdeenshire 's population has increased by 9.1 % since 2001 , while Scotland 's total population grew by only 3.8 % .
The census lists a relatively high proportion of under 16s and slightly less people of working-age compared with the Scottish average .
The twelve biggest settlements in Aberdeenshire ( with 2011 population estimates ) are :
Aberdeenshire 's Gross Domestic Product ( GDP ) is estimated at £3,496m ( 2011 ) , representing 5.2 % of the Scottish total .
Aberdeenshire 's economy is closely linked to Aberdeen City 's ( GDP £7,906m ) and in 2011 the region as a whole was calculated to contribute 16.8 % of Scotland 's GDP.
Between 2012 and 2014 the combined Aberdeenshire and Aberdeen City economic forecast GDP growth rate is 6.8 % , the highest growth rate of any local council area and above the Scottish rate of 4.8 % .
A significant proportion of Aberdeenshire 's working residents commute to Aberdeen City for work , varying from 11.5 % from Fraserburgh to 65 % from Westhill .
Average Gross Weekly Earnings ( for full-time employees employed in work places in Aberdeenshire in 2011 ) are £570.60 .
This is lower than the Scottish average by £4.10 and a fall of 2.6 % on the 2010 figure .
The average gross weekly pay of people resident in Aberdeenshire is much higher , at £641.90 , as many people commute out
Total employment ( excluding farm data ) in Aberdeenshire is estimated at 93,700 employees ( Business Register and
The majority of employees work within the service sector , predominantly in public administration , education and health .
Almost 19 % of employment is within the public sector .
Aberdeenshire 's economy remains closely linked to Aberdeen City 's and the North Sea oil industry , with many employees in oil related jobs .
The average monthly unemployment ( claimant count ) rate for Aberdeenshire in 2011 was 1.5 % .
This is lower than the average rates for Aberdeen City ( 2.3 % ) , Scotland ( 4.2 % ) and the UK ( 3.8 % ) .
The council has 68 councillors , elected in 19 multi-member wards by Single Transferable Vote .
The 2012 elections resulted in the following representation :
The overall political composition of the council , following subsequent defections and by-elections , is as follows :
The Council 's Revenue Budget for 2012/13 totals approx £548 million .
The Education , Learning and Leisure Service takes the largest share of budget ( 52.3 % ) , followed by Housing and Social Work ( 24.3 % ) ,
Joint Boards ( such as Fire and Police ) and Misc services ( 7.9 % ) and Trading Activities ( 0.4 % ) .
21.5 % of the revenue is raised locally through the Council Tax .
Average Band D Council Tax is £1,141 ( 2012/13 ) , no change on the previous year .
The current chief executive of the Council is Colin D Mackenzie and the elected Council Leader is Jim Gifford .
Aberdeenshire also has a Provost , who is Councillor Jill Webster .
The council has devolved power to six area committees : Banff and Buchan ; Buchan ; Formartine ; Garioch ; Marr ; and Kincardine and Mearns .
Each area committee takes decisions on local issues such as planning applications , and the split is meant to reflect the diverse circumstances of each area .
The following significant structures or places are within Aberdeenshire :
There are numerous rivers and burns in Aberdeenshire , including Cowie Water , Carron Water , Burn of Muchalls , River Dee , River Don , River Ury , River Ythan , Water of Feugh , Burn of Myrehouse , Laeca Burn and Luther Water .
Numerous bays and estuaries are found along the seacoast of Aberdeenshire , including Banff Bay , Ythan Estuary , Stonehaven Bay and Thornyhive Bay .
Aberdeenshire is in the rain shadow of the Grampians , therefore it is a generally dry climate , with portions of the coast , receiving of moisture annually .
Summers are mild and winters are typically cold in Aberdeenshire ; Coastal temperatures are moderated by the North Sea such that coastal areas are typically cooler in the summer and warmer in winter than inland locations .
Coastal areas are also subject to haar , or coastal fog .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Angst means fear or anxiety ( "anguish " is its Latinate equivalent , and "anxious , " "anxiety " are of similar origin ) .
The word "angst " was introduced into English from the Danish and Dutch word "angst " and the German word " Angst " .
It is attested since the 19th century in English translations of the works of Kierkegaard and Freud .
It is used in English to describe an intense feeling of apprehension , anxiety , or inner turmoil .
In other languages such as Danish , Dutch and German the word angst is not a loanword as it is in English , but has been in existence long , and is used regularly to express fear .
In German , the technical terminology of psychology and philosophy distinguishes between " Angst " and " Furcht " in that " Furcht " is a negative anticipation regarding a concrete threat , while " Angst " is a non-directional and unmotivated emotion .
In common language , however , " Angst " is the normal word for "fear" , while " Furcht " is an elevated synonym .
In other languages having the meaning of the Latin word "pavor" , the derived words differ in meaning , e.g . as in the French "anxiété " and "peur" .
The word " Angst " has existed since the 8th century , from the Proto-Indo-European root " *anghu-" , "restraint " from which Old High German "angust " developed .
It is pre-cognate with the Latin "angustia" , "tensity , tightness " and "angor" , " choking , clogging " ; compare to the Ancient Greek ἄγχω ( "ankho" ) " strangle " .
In Existentialist philosophy the term "angst " carries a specific conceptual meaning .
The use of the term was first attributed to Danish philosopher Søren Kierkegaard ( 1813–1855 ) .
In " The Concept of Anxiety " ( also known as " The Concept of Dread" , depending on the translation ) , Kierkegaard used the word " Angest " ( in common Danish , "angst" , meaning "dread " or "anxiety " ) to describe a profound and deep-seated condition .
Where animals are guided solely by instinct , said Kierkegaard , human beings enjoy a freedom of choice that we find both appealing and terrifying .
Kierkegaard 's concept of angst reappeared in the works of existentialist philosophers who followed , such as Friedrich Nietzsche , Jean-Paul Sartre and Martin Heidegger , each of whom developed the idea further in individual ways .
While Kierkegaard 's angst referred mainly to ambiguous feelings about moral freedom within a religious personal belief system , later existentialists discussed conflicts of personal principles , cultural norms , and existential despair .
Existential angst makes its appearance in classical musical composition in the early twentieth century as a result of both philosophical developments and as a reflection of the war-torn times .
Notable composers whose works are often linked with the concept include Gustav Mahler , Richard Strauss ( operas " Elektra " and " Salome )" , Claude-Achille Debussy ( opera " Pelleas et Melisande" , ballet " Jeux" , other works ) , Jean Sibelius (especially the Fourth Symphony ) , Arnold Schoenberg "( A Survivor from Warsaw" , other works ) , Alban Berg , Francis Poulenc ( opera " Dialogues of the Carmelites " ) , Dmitri Shostakovich ( opera " Lady Macbeth of the Mtsensk District" , symphonies and chamber music ) , Béla Bartók ( opera " Bluebeard 's Castle" , other works ) , and Krzysztof Penderecki (especially " Threnody to the Victims of Hiroshima" ) .
Angst began to be discussed in reference to popular music in the mid - to late 1950s amid widespread concerns over international tensions and nuclear proliferation .
Jeff Nuttall 's book " Bomb Culture " ( 1968 ) traced angst in popular culture to Hiroshima .
Dread was expressed in works of folk rock such as Bob Dylan 's " Masters of War " ( 1963 ) and " A Hard Rain 's a-Gonna Fall" .
The term often makes an appearance in reference to heavy metal , punk rock , grunge , nu metal , emo , and works of alternative rock where expressions of melancholy , existential despair or nihilism predominate .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Anxiety is an unpleasant state of inner turmoil , often accompanied by nervous behavior , such as pacing back and forth , somatic complaints and rumination .
It is the subjectively unpleasant feelings of dread over something unlikely to happen , such as the feeling of imminent death .
Anxiety is not the same as fear , which is a response to a real or perceived immediate threat ; whereas anxiety is the expectation of future threat .
Anxiety is a feeling of fear , worry , and uneasiness , usually generalized and unfocused as an overreaction to a situation that is only subjectively seen as menacing .
It is often accompanied by muscular tension , restlessness , fatigue , and problems in concentration .
Anxiety can be appropriate , but when it is too much and continues too long , the individual may suffer from an anxiety disorder .
Anxiety is distinguished from fear , which is an appropriate cognitive and emotional response to a perceived threat and is related to the specific behaviors of fight-or-flight responses , defensive behavior or escape .
Anxiety occurs in situations only perceived as uncontrollable or unavoidable , but not realistically so .
David Barlow defines anxiety as " a future-oriented mood state in which one is ready or prepared to attempt to cope with upcoming negative events , " and that it is a distinction between future and present dangers which divides anxiety and fear .
Another description of anxiety is agony , dread , terror , or even apprehension .
In positive psychology , anxiety is described as the mental state that results from a difficult challenge for which the subject has insufficient coping skills .
Fear and anxiety can be differentiated in four domains : ( 1 ) duration of emotional experience , ( 2 ) temporal focus , ( 3 ) specificity of the threat , and ( 4 ) motivated direction .
Fear is defined as short lived , present focused , geared towards a specific threat , and facilitating escape from threat ; while anxiety is defined as long acting , future focused , broadly focused towards a diffuse threat , and promoting excessive caution while approaching a potential threat and interferes with constructive coping .
Symptoms of anxiety can range in number , intensity , and frequency , depending on the person .
While almost everyone has experienced anxiety at some point in their lives , most do not develop long-term problems with anxiety .
The behavioral effects of anxiety may include withdrawal from situations which have provoked anxiety in the past .
Anxiety can also be experienced in ways which include changes in sleeping patterns , nervous habits , and increased motor tension like foot tapping .
The emotional effects of anxiety may include "feelings of apprehension or dread , trouble concentrating , feeling tense or jumpy , anticipating the worst , irritability , restlessness , watching ( and waiting ) for signs ( and occurrences ) of danger , and , feeling like your mind 's gone blank " as well as "nightmares/bad dreams , obsessions about sensations , deja vu , a trapped in your mind feeling , and feeling like everything is scary . "
The cognitive effects of anxiety may include thoughts about suspected dangers , such as fear of dying .
" You may ... fear that the chest pains are a deadly heart attack or that the shooting pains in your head are the result of a tumor or aneurysm .
You feel an intense fear when you think of dying , or you may think of it more often than normal , or ca n't get it out of your mind . "
The philosopher Søren Kierkegaard , in " The Concept of Anxiety , " described anxiety or dread associated with the "dizziness of freedom " and suggested the possibility for positive resolution of anxiety through the self-conscious exercise of responsibility and choosing .
In " Art and Artist " ( 1932 ) , the psychologist Otto Rank wrote that the psychological trauma of birth was the pre-eminent human symbol of existential anxiety and encompasses the creative person 's simultaneous fear of – and desire for – separation , individuation and differentiation .
The theologian Paul Tillich characterized existential anxiety as " the state in which a being is aware of its possible nonbeing " and he listed three categories for the nonbeing and resulting anxiety : ontic ( fate and death ) , moral ( guilt and condemnation ) , and spiritual (emptiness and meaninglessness ) .
According to Tillich , the last of these three types of existential anxiety , i .e . spiritual anxiety , is predominant in modern times while the others were predominant in earlier periods .
Tillich argues that this anxiety can be accepted as part of the human condition or it can be resisted but with negative consequences .
In its pathological form , spiritual anxiety may tend to "drive the person toward the creation of certitude in systems of meaning which are supported by tradition and authority " even though such "undoubted certitude is not built on the rock of reality" .
According to Viktor Frankl , the author of " Man 's Search for Meaning" , when a person is faced with extreme mortal dangers , the most basic of all human wishes is to find a meaning of life to combat the " trauma of nonbeing " as death is near .
According to Yerkes-Dodson law , an optimal level of arousal is necessary to best complete a task such as an exam , performance , or competitive event .
However , when the anxiety or level of arousal exceeds that optimum , the result is a decline in performance .
Test anxiety is the uneasiness , apprehension , or nervousness felt by students who have a fear of failing an exam .
Students who have test anxiety may experience any of the following : the association of grades with personal worth ; fear of embarrassment by a teacher ; fear of alienation from parents or friends ; time pressures ; or feeling a loss of control .
Sweating , dizziness , headaches , racing heartbeats , nausea , fidgeting , uncontrollable crying or laughing and drumming on a desk are all common .
Because test anxiety hinges on fear of negative evaluation , debate exists as to whether test anxiety is itself a unique anxiety disorder or whether it is a specific type of social phobia .
The DSM-IV classifies test anxiety as a type of social phobia .
While the term "test anxiety " refers specifically to students , many workers share the same experience with regard to their career or profession .
The fear of failing at a task and being negatively evaluated for failure can have a similarly negative effect on the adult .
Management of test anxiety focuses on achieving relaxation and developing mechanisms to manage anxiety .
Humans generally require social acceptance and thus sometimes dread the disapproval of others .
Apprehension of being judged by others may cause anxiety in social environments .
Anxiety during social interactions , particularly between strangers , is common among young people .
It may persist into adulthood and become social anxiety or social phobia .
" Stranger anxiety " in small children is not considered a phobia .
In adults , an excessive fear of other people is not a developmentally common stage ; it is called social anxiety .
According to Cutting , social phobics do not fear the crowd but the fact that they may be judged negatively .
For some people it is characterized by experiencing discomfort or awkwardness during physical social contact ( e .g .
embracing , shaking hands , etc. ) , while in other cases it can lead to a fear of interacting with unfamiliar people altogether .
Those suffering from this condition may restrict their lifestyles to accommodate the anxiety , minimizing social interaction whenever possible .
Social anxiety also forms a core aspect of certain personality disorders , including Avoidant Personality Disorder .
To the extent that a person is fearful of social encounters with unfamiliar others , some people may experience anxiety particularly during interactions with outgroup members , or people who share different group memberships ( i .e . , by race , ethnicity , class , gender , etc. ) .
Depending on the nature of the antecedent relations , cognitions , and situational factors , intergroup contact may stressful , and lead to feelings of anxiety .
This apprehension or fear of contact with outgroup members is often called interracial or intergroup anxiety .
As is the case in the more generalized forms of social anxiety , intergroup anxiety has behavioral , cognitive , and affective effects .
For instance , increases in schematic processing and simplified information processing can occur when anxiety is high .
Indeed , such is consistent with related work on attentional bias in implicit memory .
Additionally recent research has found that implicit racial evaluations ( i .e .
automatic prejudiced attitudes ) can be amplified during intergroup interaction .
Negative experiences have been illustrated in producing not only negative expectations , but also avoidant , or otherwise antagonistic , behavior such as hostility .
Furthermore , when compared to anxiety levels and cognitive effort ( e .g. , impression management and self-presentation ) in intragroup contexts , levels and depletion of resources may be exacerbated in the intergroup situation .
Anxiety can be either a short term 'state ' or a long term " trait " .
Trait anxiety reflects a stable tendency to respond with state anxiety in the anticipation of threatening situations .
It is closely related to the personality trait of neuroticism .
Anxiety induced by the need to choose between similar options is increasingly being recognized as a problem for individuals and for organizations ." Today
we 're all faced with greater choice , more competition and less time to consider our options or seek out the right advice . "
In a decision context , unpredictability or uncertainty may trigger emotional responses in anxious individuals that systematically alter decision-making .
There are primarily two forms of this anxiety type .
The first form refers to a choice in which there are multiple potential outcomes with known or calculable probabilities .
The second form refers to the uncertainty and ambiguity related to a decision context in which there are multiple possible outcomes with unknown probabilities .
In some Buddhist meditation literature , this effect is described as something which arises naturally and should be turned toward and mindfully explored in order to gain insight into the nature of emotion , and more profoundly , the nature of self .
Anxiety disorders are a group of mental disorders characterized by feelings of anxiety and fear , where anxiety is a worry about future events and fear is a reaction to current events .
These feelings may cause physical symptoms , such as a racing heart and shakiness .
There are various forms of anxiety disorders , including generalized anxiety disorder , phobic disorder , and panic disorder .
While each has its own characteristics and symptoms , they all include symptoms of anxiety .
Anxiety disorders are partly genetic but may also be due to drug use including alcohol and caffeine , as well as withdrawal from certain drugs .
They often occur with other mental disorders , particularly major depressive disorder , bipolar disorder , certain personality disorders , and eating disorders .
The term anxiety covers four aspects of experiences that an individual may have : mental apprehension , physical tension , physical symptoms and dissociative anxiety .
The emotions present in anxiety disorders range from simple nervousness to bouts of terror .
There are other psychiatric and medical problems that may mimic the symptoms of an anxiety disorder , such as hyperthyroidism .
Common treatment options include lifestyle changes , therapy , and medications .
Medications are typically recommended only if other measures are not effective .
Anxiety disorders occur about twice as often in females as males , and generally begin during childhood .
As many as 18 % of Americans and 14 % of Europeans may be affected by one or more anxiety disorders .
Anxiety risk factors include family history ( e .g . of anxiety ) and parenting factors including parental rejection , lack of parental warmth , high hostility , harsh discipline , high maternal negative affect , anxious childrearing , modelling of dysfunctional and drug-abusing behaviour , and child abuse (emotional , physical and sexual ) .
Research upon adolescents who as infants had been highly apprehensive , vigilant , and fearful finds that their nucleus accumbens is more sensitive than that in other people when deciding to make an action that determined whether they received a reward .
This suggests a link between circuits responsible for fear and also reward in anxious people .
As researchers note , " a sense of 'responsibility ' , or self agency , in a context of uncertainty ( probabilistic outcomes ) drives the neural system underlying appetitive motivation ( i .e . , nucleus accumbens ) more strongly in temperamentally inhibited than noninhibited adolescents " .
Anxiety is also linked and perpetuated by the person 's own pessimistic outcome expectancy and how they cope with feedback negativity .
pessimism ) have been found to be risk factors for anxiety .
Some writers believe that excessive anxiety can lead to an overpotentiation of the limbic system , giving increased future anxiety , but this does not appear to have been proven .
Contextual factors that are thought to contribute to anxiety include gender socialization and learning experiences .
In particular , learning mastery ( the degree to which people perceive their lives to be under their own control ) and instrumentality , which includes such traits as self-confidence , independence , and competitiveness fully mediate the relation between gender and anxiety .
That is , though gender differences in anxiety exist , with higher levels of anxiety in women compared to men , gender socialization and learning mastery explain these gender differences .
Research has demonstrated the ways in which facial prominence in photographic images differs between men and women .
More specifically , in official online photographs of politicians around the world , women 's faces are less prominent than men 's .
Interestingly enough , the difference in these images actually tended to be greater in cultures with greater institutional gender equality .
An evolutionary psychology explanation is that increased anxiety serves the purpose of increased vigilance regarding potential threats in the environment as well as increased tendency to take proactive actions regarding such possible threats .
This may cause false positive reactions but an individual suffering from anxiety may also avoid real threats .
This may explain why anxious people are less likely to die due to accidents .
Neural circuitry involving the amygdala and hippocampus is thought to underlie anxiety .
When people are confronted with unpleasant and potentially harmful stimuli such as foul odors or tastes , PET-scans show increased bloodflow in the amygdala .
In these studies , the participants also reported moderate anxiety .
This might indicate that anxiety is a protective mechanism designed to prevent the organism from engaging in potentially harmful behaviors .
Although single genes have little effect on complex traits and interact heavily both between themselves and with the external factors , research is under-way to unravel possible molecular mechanisms underlying anxiety and comorbid conditions .
One candidate gene with polymorphisms that influence anxiety is PLXNA2 .
Anxiety can be a symptom of an underlying health problems such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease ( COPD) , heart failure , or heart arrythmia .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Asociación Alumni , usually just Alumni , is a rugby union and former football club located in Tortuguitas , Greater Buenos Aires , Argentina .
The club was originally founded as a football team in 1891 , with the name " English High School " ( the school where they came from ) although it was obliged to change its name to " Alumni Athletic Club " ( the name was proposed by a former student of the English High School ) in 1901 .
Alumni was the most successful team in the amateur era of Argentine football , winning 10 of the 14 league championships contested , being considered the first great football team .
Alumni was reorganised in 1908 , "in order to encourage people to practise all kind of sports , specially football" .
This was the last try to develop itself as a sports club rather than just a football team , such as Lomas , Belgrano and Quilmes had successfully done in the past , but the efforts were not enough .
Alumni played its last game in 1911 and was definitely dissolved on April 24 , 1913 .
In 1951 a group of English High School alumni asked the school for permission to re-establish the name " Alumni " for a rugby team .
This request was immediately approved in a meeting presided by Carlos Bowers , who had proposed the name " Alumni " to the original football team 50 years before .
The team achieved good results and in 1960 the club presented a team that won the third division of the Buenos Aires league , reaching the second division .
Since then , Alumni has played at the highest level of Argentinian rugby and its rivalry with Belgrano Athletic Club is one of the fiercest local derbies in Buenos Aires .
Alumni would later climb up to first division winning 5 titles : 4 consecutive between 1989 and 1992 , and the other in 2001 .
In 2002 , Alumni won its first Nacional de Clubes title , defeating Jockey Club de Rosario 23-21 in the final .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Anatoly Yevgenyevich Karpov , PhD ( , " Anatolij Evgen'evič Karpov" ; born May 23 , 1951 ) is a Russian chess grandmaster and former World Champion .
He was the official world champion from 1975 to 1985 when he was defeated by Garry Kasparov.
He played three matches against Kasparov for the title from 1986 to 1990 , before becoming FIDE World Champion once again after Kasparov broke away from FIDE in 1993 .
He held the title until 1999 , when he resigned his title in protest against FIDE 's new world championship rules .
For his decades-long standing among the world 's elite , Karpov is considered by many to be one of the greatest players of all time .
His tournament successes include over 160 first-place finishes .
He had a peak Elo rating of 2780 , and his 90 total months at world number one is second all-time behind only Garry Kasparov since the inception of the FIDE ranking list in 1970 .
Since 2005 , he has been a member of the Public Chamber of Russia .
He has recently involved himself in several humanitarian causes , such as advocating the use of iodised salt .
On December 17 , 2012 , Karpov supported the law in the Russian Parliament banning adoption of Russian orphans by citizens of the US.
Karpov was born on May 23 , 1951 at Zlatoust in the Urals region of the former Soviet Union , and learned to play chess at the age of four .
His early rise in chess was swift , as he became a Candidate Master by age eleven .
At twelve , he was accepted into Mikhail Botvinnik 's prestigious chess school , though Botvinnik made the following remark about the young Karpov : " The boy does not have a clue about chess , and there 's no future at all for him in this profession . "
Karpov acknowledged that his understanding of chess theory was very confused at that time , and wrote later that the homework which Botvinnik assigned greatly helped him , since it required that he consult chess books and work diligently .
Karpov improved so quickly under Botvinnik 's tutelage that he became the youngest Soviet National Master in history at fifteen in 1966 ; this tied the record established by Boris Spassky in 1952 .
Karpov finished first in his first international tournament in Třinec several months later , ahead of Viktor Kupreichik .
In 1967 , he won the annual European Junior Championship at Groningen .
Karpov won a gold medal for academic excellence in high school , and entered Moscow State University in 1968 to study mathematics .
He later transferred to Leningrad State University , eventually graduating from there in economics .
One reason for the transfer was to be closer to his coach , grandmaster Semyon Furman , who lived in Leningrad .
In his writings , Karpov credits Furman as a major influence on his development as a world-class player .
In 1969 , Karpov became the first Soviet player since Spassky ( 1955 ) to win the World Junior Chess Championship , scoring an undefeated 10/11 in the finals at Stockholm .
In 1970 , he tied for fourth place at an international tournament in Caracas , Venezuela , and was awarded the grandmaster title .
He won the 1971 Alekhine Memorial in Moscow ( equal with Leonid Stein ) , ahead of a star-studded field , for his first significant adult victory .
His Elo rating shot from 2540 in 1971 to 2660 in 1973 , when he shared second in the USSR Chess Championship , and finished equal first with Viktor Korchnoi in the Leningrad Interzonal Tournament , with the latter success qualifying him for the 1974 Candidates Matches , which would determine the challenger of the reigning world champion , Bobby Fischer .
Karpov defeated Lev Polugaevsky by the score of +3 =5 in the first Candidates ' match , earning the right to face former champion Boris Spassky in the semifinal round .
Karpov was on record saying that he believed Spassky would easily beat him and win the Candidates ' cycle to face Fischer , and that he ( Karpov ) would win the following Candidates ' cycle in 1977 .
Spassky won the first game as Black in good style , but tenacious , aggressive play from Karpov secured him overall victory by +4 −1 =6 .
The Candidates ' final was played in Moscow with Korchnoi .
Karpov took an early lead , winning the second game against the Sicilian Dragon , then scoring another victory in the sixth game .
Following ten consecutive draws , Korchnoi threw away a winning position in the seventeenth game to give Karpov a 3–0 lead .
In game 19 , Korchnoi succeeded in winning a long endgame , then notched a speedy victory after a blunder by Karpov two games later .
Three more draws , the last agreed by Karpov in a clearly better position , closed the match , as he thus prevailed +3 −2 =19 , moving on to challenge Fischer for the world title .
Though a world championship match between Karpov and Fischer was highly anticipated , those hopes were never realised .
Fischer insisted that the match be the first to ten wins ( draws not counting ) , but that the champion would retain the crown if the score was tied 9–9 .
FIDE , the International Chess Federation , refused to allow this proviso , and after Fischer 's resignation of the championship on June 27 , 1974 , FIDE declared that Fischer forfeited his crown .
Karpov later attempted to set up another match with Fischer , but all the negotiations fell through .
This thrust the young Karpov into the role of World Champion without having faced the reigning champion .
Garry Kasparov argued that Karpov would have had good chances , because he had beaten Spassky convincingly and was a new breed of tough professional , and indeed had higher quality games , while Fischer had been inactive for three years .
Spassky thought that Fischer would have won in 1975 but Karpov would have qualified again and beaten Fischer in 1978 .
Determined to prove himself a legitimate champion , Karpov participated in nearly every major tournament for the next ten years .
He convincingly won the very strong Milan tournament in 1975 , and captured his first of three Soviet titles in 1976 .
He created a phenomenal streak of tournament wins against the strongest players in the world .
Karpov held the record for most consecutive tournament victories ( nine ) until it was shattered by Garry Kasparov ( 14 ) .
In 1978 , Karpov 's first title defence was against Korchnoi , the opponent he had defeated in the 1973–75 Candidates ' cycle ; the match was played at Baguio , Philippines , with the winner needing six victories .
As in 1974 , Karpov took an early lead , winning the eighth game after seven draws to open the match , but Korchnoi staged a comeback late in the match , as , after the score was +5 −2 =20 in Karpov 's favour , he won three of the next four games to draw level , with Karpov then winning the next game to retain the title ( +6 −5 =21 ) .
Three years later Korchnoi re-emerged as the Candidates ' winner against German finalist Dr. Robert Hübner to challenge Karpov in Merano , Italy .
This match , however , was won handily by Karpov , the score being ( 11–7 , +6 −2 =10 ) in what is remembered as the " Massacre in Merano" .
Karpov 's tournament career reached a peak at the Montreal " Tournament of Stars " tournament in 1979 , where he finished joint first ( +7 −1 =10 ) with Mikhail Tal , ahead of a field of strong grandmasters completed by Jan Timman , Ljubomir Ljubojević , Spassky , Vlastimil Hort , Lajos Portisch , Huebner , Bent Larsen and Lubomir Kavalek .
He also won the prestigious Bugojno tournament in 1978 ( shared ) and 1980 , the Linares tournament in 1981 ( shared with Larry Christiansen ) and 1994 , the Tilburg tournament in 1977 , 1979 , 1980 , 1982 , and 1983 , and the Soviet Championship in 1976 , 1983 , and 1988 .
Karpov represented the Soviet Union at six Chess Olympiads , in all of which the USSR won the team gold medal .
He played first reserve at Skopje 1972 , winning the board prize with 13/15 .
At Nice 1974 , he advanced to board one and again won the board prize with 12/14 .
At La Valletta 1980 , he was again board one and scored 9/12 .
At Lucerne 1982 , he scored 6½/8 on board one .
At Dubai 1986 , he scored 6/9 on board two .
His last was Thessaloniki 1988 , where on board two he scored 8/10 .
In Olympiad play , Karpov lost only two games out of 68 played .
To illustrate Karpov 's dominance over his peers as champion , his score was +11 −2 =20 versus Spassky , +5 =12 versus Robert Hübner , +6 −1 =16 versus Ulf Andersson , +3 −1 =10 versus Vasily Smyslov , +1 =16 versus Mikhail Tal , +10 −2 =13 versus Ljubojević .
Karpov had cemented his position as the world 's best player and world champion by the time Garry Kasparov arrived on the scene .
In their first match , the World Chess Championship 1984 , held in Moscow , with the victor again being the first to win six games outright , Karpov built a 4–0 lead after nine games .
The next seventeen games were drawn , setting the record for world title matches , and it took Karpov until game 27 to gain his fifth win .
In game 31 , Karpov had a winning position but failed to take advantage and settled for a draw .
He lost the next game , after which fourteen more draws ensued .
In particular , Karpov held a solidly winning position in Game 41 , but again blundered and had to settle for a draw .
After Kasparov won games 47 and 48 , FIDE President Florencio Campomanes unilaterally terminated the match , citing the health of the players .
The match had lasted an unprecedented five months , with five wins for Karpov , three for Kasparov , and forty draws .
A rematch was set for later in 1985 , also in Moscow .
The events of the so-called Marathon Match forced FIDE to return to the previous format , a match limited to 24 games ( with Karpov remaining champion if the match should finish 12–12 ) .
Karpov needed to win the final game to draw the match and retain his title , but wound up losing , thus surrendering the title to his opponent .
The final score was 13-11 ( +3 −5 =16 ) , in favour of Kasparov.
Karpov remained a formidable opponent ( and the world # 2 ) until the early 1990s .
He fought Kasparov in three more world championship matches in 1986 ( held in London and Leningrad ) , 1987 ( held in Seville ) , and 1990 ( held in New York City and Lyon ) .
All three matches were extremely close : the scores were 11½ to 12½ ( +4 −5 =15 ) , 12 to 12 ( +4 −4 =16 ) , and 11½ to 12½ ( +3 −4 =17 ) .
In all three matches , Karpov had winning chances up to the very last games .
In particular , the 1987 Seville match featured an astonishing blunder by Kasparov in the 23rd game .
In the final game , needing only a draw to win the title , Karpov cracked under pressure from the clock at the end of the first session of play , missed a variation leading to an almost forced draw , and allowed Kasparov to adjourn the game with an extra pawn .
After a further mistake in the second session , Karpov was slowly ground down and resigned on move 64 , ending the match and allowing Kasparov to keep the title .
In their five world championship matches , Karpov scored 19 wins , 21 losses , and 104 draws in 144 games .
Karpov is on record saying that if he had the opportunity to play Fischer for the crown in his twenties , he could have been a much better player as a result .
In 1992 , Karpov lost a Candidates Match against Nigel Short .
But in 1993 , Karpov reacquired the FIDE World Champion title when Kasparov and Short split from FIDE.
Karpov defeated Timman – the loser of the Candidates ' final against Short .
The next major meeting of Kasparov and Karpov was the 1994 Linares chess tournament .
The field , in eventual finishing order , was Karpov , Kasparov , Shirov , Bareev , Kramnik , Lautier , Anand , Kamsky , Topalov , Ivanchuk , Gelfand , Illescas , Judit Polgár , and Beliavsky ; with an average Elo rating of 2685 , the highest ever at that time , making it the first Category XVIII tournament ever held .
Impressed by the strength of the tournament , Kasparov had said several days before the tournament that the winner could rightly be called the world champion of tournaments .
Perhaps spurred on by this comment , Karpov played the best tournament of his life .
He was undefeated and earned 11 points out of 13 possible ( the best world-class tournament winning percentage since Alekhine won San Remo in 1930 ) , finishing 2½ points ahead of second-place Kasparov and Shirov.
Many of his wins were spectacular ( in particular , his win over Topalov is considered possibly the finest of his career ) .
This performance against the best players in the world put his Elo rating tournament performance at 2985 , the highest performance rating of any player in history up until 2009 , when Magnus Carlsen won the category XXI Pearl Spring chess tournament with a performance of 3002 .
However , chess statistician Jeff Sonas still considers Karpov 's Linares performance as the best tournament result in history .
Karpov defended his FIDE title against Gata Kamsky ( +6 −3 =9 ) in 1996 .
However , in 1998 , FIDE largely scrapped the old system of Candidates ' Matches , instead having a large knockout event in which a large number of players contested short matches against each other over just a few weeks .
In the first of these events , the FIDE World Chess Championship 1998 , champion Karpov was seeded straight into the final , defeating Viswanathan Anand ( +2 −2 =2 , rapid tiebreak 2:0 ) .
In the subsequent cycle , the format was changed , with the champion having to qualify .
Karpov refused to defend his title , and ceased to be FIDE World Champion after the FIDE World Chess Championship 1999 .
Karpov 's outstanding classical tournament play has been seriously limited since 1995 , since he prefers to be more involved in politics of his home country of Russia .
He had been a member of the Supreme Soviet Commission for Foreign Affairs and the President of the Soviet Peace Fund before the Soviet Union dissolved .
In addition , he had been involved in several disputes with FIDE and became increasingly disillusioned with chess .
In the September 2009 FIDE rating list , he dropped out of the world 's Top 100 for the first time .
Karpov usually limits his play to exhibition events , and has revamped his style to specialize in rapid chess .
In 2002 he won a match against Kasparov , defeating him in a rapid time control match 2½–1½ .
In 2006 , he tied for first with Kasparov in a blitz tournament , ahead of Korchnoi and Judit Polgár .
Karpov and Kasparov played a mixed 12-game match from September 21–24 , 2009 , in Valencia , Spain .
It consisted of four rapid ( or semi rapid ) and eight blitz games and took place exactly 25 years after the two players ' legendary encounter at World Chess Championship 1984 .
Karpov played a match against Yasser Seirawan in 2012 in St Louis , Missouri , an important center of the North American chess scene , with Anatoly Karpov winning the match .
In November 2012 , he won the Cap d'Agde rapid tournament which bears his name ( Anatoly Karpov Trophy ) by beating Vassily Ivanchuk ( ranked 9th in the October 2012 FIDE world rankings ) in the final .
Tabulation number of wins in major recurring chess tournaments .
Among the many tournaments organized , some particularly stand out because of history or category .
This tabulation gives an overview of the number of wins in the major recurring chess tournaments and world championship matches .
( Rapid , blitz and blindfold games not included ; listed as +wins −losses =draws as of May 2 , 2014.)<br>
" Players who have been undisputed World Champions in boldface "
In March 2010 Karpov announced that he would be a candidate for the presidency of FIDE.
The election took place in September 2010 at the 39th Chess Olympiad .
In May a fund-raising event took place in New York with the participation of his former rival Garry Kasparov and of Magnus Carlsen , both of whom supported his bid and campaigned for him .
Also Nigel Short has announced he supported Karpov 's candidacy .
However , on September 29 , 2010 , Kirsan Ilyumzhinov was reelected as President of FIDE , winning the election by 95 votes to 55 .
Karpov 's "boa constrictor " playing style is solidly positional , taking no risks but reacting mercilessly to any tiny errors made by his opponents .
As a result , he is often compared to his idol , the famous José Raúl Capablanca , the third World Champion .
Karpov himself describes his style as follows :Let us say the game may be continued in two ways : one of them is a beautiful tactical blow that gives rise to variations that do n't yield to precise calculation ; the other is clear positional pressure that leads to an endgame with microscopic chances of victory ...
I would choose the latter without thinking twice .
If the opponent offers keen play I do n't object ; but in such cases I get less satisfaction , even if I win , than from a game conducted according to all the rules of strategy with its ruthless logic .
Karpov 's extensive stamp collection of Belgium philately and Belgian Congo stamps and postal history covering mail from 1742 through 1980 is being disposed of by David Feldman 's auction company in December 2011 .
He is also known to have a large chess stamp and chess book collections .
His private chess library consists of over 9000 books .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
This article is about the demographic features of the population of Antigua and Barbuda , including population density , ethnicity , religious affiliations and other aspects of the population .
According to the 2011 census the estimated resident population of Antigua and Barbuda was 86,295 .
The estimated mid-year population of 2014 is 90,900 ( medium fertility scenario of The 2012 Revison of the World Population Prospects ) .
The population of Antigua and Barbuda , is predominantly black (91.0 % ) or mixed ( 4.4 % ) .
1.9 % of the population is white and 0.7 % East Indian .
There is also a small Amerindian population : 177 in 1991 and 214 in 2001 ( 0.3 % of the total population ) .
The remaining 1.6 % of the population includes people from the Middle East ( 0.6 % ) and Chinese ( 0.2 % ) .
The 2001 census disclosed that 19,425 , or 30 per cent of the total population of Antigua and Barbuda , reported their place of birth as a foreign country .
Over 15,000 of these persons were from other Caribbean states , representing 80 of the total foreign born .
Approximately 4,500 or 23 per cent of all foreign
born came from Guyana , 3,300 or 17 per cent came from Dominica and 2,800 or 14 per cent
The largest single group from a country outside the region came from the
Of the total of 1,715 persons , nine per cent of the foreign born , came
from the United States while three per cent and one per cent came from the United Kingdom and Canada , respectively .
English is the country 's official language , but many people speak Creole English .
According to the 2001 census , 92 % of the population of Antigua and Barbuda is considered Christian , 1.9 % has a non-Christian religion and 4.1 % has no religion or did not state a religion ( 1.7 % ) .
Anglicanism constitutes the largest religious group , with 25.7 % of the population .
Seventh-day Adventists are the second largest group ( 12.3 % ) .
The next largest group is the Pentecostals 10.6 % of the population , followed by Moravians ( 10.5 % ) .
Other Christians include Methodists ( 7.9 % ) Baptists ( 4.9 % ) , Church of God ( 4.5 % ) , Evangelicals ( 2.6 % ) , Jehovah 's Witnesses ( 1.6 % ) , Brethren ( 0.3 % ) , the Salvation Army ( 0.6 % ) .
Other religious groups include the Rastafarian Movement ( 1.3 % of the population ) , Muslims ( 0.3 % ) , Hinduism ( 0.2 % ) , and the Bahá'í Faith ( 0.1 % ) .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
The Armed Forces of the Republic of Armenia comprise two services : the Army , and the Air Force and Air Defense ( a unified branch ) .
It was partially formed out of the former Soviet Army forces stationed in the Armenian SSR ( mostly units of the 7th Guards Army of the Transcaucasian Military District ) .
Being a landlocked country , Armenia has no navy .
The Commander-in-Chief of the military is the President of Armenia , Serzh Sargsyan .
The Ministry of Defense is in charge of political leadership , headed by Seyran Ohanyan , while military command remains in the hands of the General Staff , headed by the Chief of Staff , who is Lieutenant-General Yuri Khatchaturov.
Armenia established a Ministry of Defense on January 28 , 1992 .
Border guards subject to the Ministry patrol Armenia 's borders with Georgia and Azerbaijan , while Russian troops continue to monitor its borders with Iran and Turkey .
Since 2002 , Armenia has been a member of the Collective Security Treaty Organization .
The Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe was ratified by the Armenian parliament in July 1992 .
The treaty establishes comprehensive limits on key categories of military equipment , such as tanks , artillery , armored combat vehicles , combat aircraft , and combat helicopters , and provides for the destruction of weaponry in excess of those limits .
Armenian officials have consistently expressed determination to comply with its provisions and thus Armenia has provided data on armaments as required under the CFE Treaty .
Despite this , Azerbaijan accuses Armenia of diverting a large part of its military forces to Nagorno-Karabakh and thus circumventing these international regulations .
Armenia is not a significant exporter of conventional weapons , but it has provided support , including material , to the Armenians of Nagorno-Karabakh during the Nagorno-Karabakh War .
In March 1993 , Armenia signed the multilateral Chemical Weapons Convention , which calls for the eventual elimination of chemical weapons .
Armenia acceded to the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty as a non-nuclear weapons state in July 1993 .
The U.S. and other Western governments have discussed efforts to establish effective nuclear export control systems with Armenia and expressed satisfaction with Armenia 's full cooperation .
The Armenian Armed Forces are Headquartered in Yerevan , where most of the general staff is based .
Headed by Chief of Staff General Seyran Ohanyan , the General Staff is responsible for operational command of the Armenian Military and its three major branches .
In addition to the services listed above , Armenia established its own Internal Troops from the former Soviet Interior Troops after the dissolution of the Soviet Union .
Up until December 2002 , Armenia maintained a Ministry of Internal Affairs , but along with the Ministry of National Security , it was reorganised as a non-ministrial institution .
The two organisations became the Police of the Republic of Armenia and the National Security Service .
In February 1999 the Deputy Minister of the Interior and Commander of the Internal Troops , Major General Artsrun Makarian , was found shot dead .
In 2013 the International Institute for Strategic Studies attributed the force with four paramilitary battalions , 55 AIFV including 44 BMP-1 , and 24 wheeled armoured personnel carriers .
According to IISS 2010 , Armenia has 20 T-80 tanks , 102 T-72 tanks , 8 T-54 tanks and 80 BMP-1 's , 7 BMP-1K , 55 BMP-2 and 12 BRM-1K.
Wheeled APCs reported included 11 BTR-60s , 21 BTR-70s , 4 BTR-80s , 145 MT-LBs , 5 BMD-1S , and 120 BRDM-2 scout vehicles .
Although the Russians have supplied newer equipment to Armenia over the years , the numbers have never been sufficient to upgrade all ground force formations and many of the lower readiness units still have older , Soviet-legacy systems that have not been upgraded or in many cases effectively maintained .
These older systems are placing great demands on the logistics system for service , maintenance , replacement parts and necessary upgrades , costing the army both financially and in overall readiness .
The ground force is engaged in an effort of reassessment , reorganisation and restructuring , as the future of Armenia 's defence needs a revised force structure and unit mix .
The army sees the need to maintain much of its traditional mechanised formations , but is looking to lighten and make more mobile and self-sustainable a small number of other formations .
It must develop these newer formations to support its international requirements and effectively operate in mountainous and other rugged terrain , but it must do this without affecting the mechanised capability that is needed to confront Azerbaijan 's conventional forces .
Since the fall of the Soviet Union , Armenia has followed a policy of developing its armed forces into a professional , well trained , and mobile military .
In 2000 , Centre for International Studies and Research reported that at that time the Armenian Army had the strongest combat capability of the three Caucasus countries ' armies ( the other two being Georgia and Azerbaijan .
CSTO Secretary , Nikolay Bordyuzha , came to a similar conclusion after collective military drills in 2007 when he stated that , " " the Armenian Army is the most efficient one in the post-Soviet space " " .
This was echoed more recently by Igor Korotchenko , a member of the Public Council , Russian Ministry of Defense , in a March 2011 interview with Voice of Russia radio .
The Army is functionally divided into " Active " and " Reserve Forces " .
Their main functions include deterrence , defense , peace support and crisis management , humanitarian and rescue missions , as well as social functions within Armenian society .
The Active Forces mainly have peacekeeping and defensive duties , and are further divided into Deployment Forces , Immediate Reaction , and Main Defense Forces .
The Reserve Forces consists of Enhancement Forces , Territorial Defense Forces , and Training Grounds .
They deal with planning and reservist preparation , armaments and equipment storage , training of formations for active forces rotation or increase in personnel .
During peacetime the Army maintains permanent combat and mobilization readiness .
They become part of multinational military formations in compliance with international treaties Armenia is a signatory to , participate in the preparation of the population , the national economy and the maintenance of wartime reserves and the infrastructure of the country for defense .
In times of crisis the Army 's main tasks relate to participation in operations countering terrorist activities and defense of strategic facilities ( such as nuclear power plants and major industrial facilities ) , assisting the security forces in proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , illegal armaments traffic and international terrorism .
In case of low - and medium-intensity military conflict the Active Forces that are part of the Army participate in carrying out the initial tasks for the defense of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the country .
In case of a high intensity conflict the Land Forces , together with the Air Force , Air Defense and Border Guards , form the defense group of the Armenian Armed Forces aiming at countering aggression and protect the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the country .
Experiments in developing small arms have been undertaken in Armenia , producing the K-3 assault rifle , but Jane 's Infantry Weapons estimates that the program has ceased , and the rifle is not in widespread service with the army .
The AK-74 is the standard issue rifle of the Armenian Army with older AKMs in reserve use .
Beside AK rifles Armenian forces use mostly Russian small arms like the Makarov PM pistol , SVD sniper rifle , and the PKM General Purpose machine Gun .
The Armenian Air Force consists of 15 Su-25 ground attack planes , 1 MiG-25 jet fighter , 16 Mil Mi-24 helicopter gunships , 6 L-39 trainer and attack aircraft , 16 Yak-52 trainer aircraft , 3 Il-76 cargo planes , 18 Mil Mi-8 transport helicopters , and 10 Mil Mi-2 light utility helicopters .
There are additional 18 MiG-29 fighter jets of the Russian 102nd Military Base at Gyumri stationed .
The Armenian Air Defense is the anti-aircraft branch of the Armed Forces of Armenia .
It was equipped and organized as part of the military reform program of Lieutenant-General Norat Ter-Grigoryants .
It consists of an anti-aircraft missile brigade and two regiments armed with 100 anti-aircraft complexes of various models and modifications , including the SA-8 , Krug , S-75 , S-125 , SA-7 , SA-10 , SA-13 , SA-16 and SA-18 .
Russia has SA-6 and S-300 long range surface-to-air missiles at the Russian 102nd Military Base .
There are also 24 Scud ballistic missiles with eight launchers .
Numerical strength is estimated at about 3,000 servicemen , with plans for further expansion .
In late December 2010 , the Armenian Defense Minister , Seyran Ohanyan , officially acknowledged that the army are equipped with the Russian-made S-300 surface-to-air missiles .
The statement was made while the Minister was inspecting a new air-defense command point that maintains “state-of-the-art equipment " built specifically for the operation of the S-300s .
Russian specialists had begun training their Armenian counterparts in 2005 in the use of the sophisticated missile systems .
Speaking to Radio Free Europe 's Armenian service , Defense Ministry spokesman David Karapetyan confirmed that the Armenian army now has S-300s in its missile arsenal .
He declined to specify their number and dates of delivery .
In addition to forces mentioned above , there are 20,000 active soldiers defending Nagorno-Karabakh , a disputed territory which seceded from Azerbaijan in 1991 and is now a de facto independent state .
They are well trained and well equipped with the latest in military software and hardware .
Karabakh army 's heavy military hardware includes : 316 tanks , 324 armored vehicles , 322 artillery pieces of calibers over 122 mm , 44 multiple rocket launchers , and a new anti-aircraft defense system .
In addition , the NKR Defence Army maintains a small air-force of 2 Su-25s , 5 Mi-24s and 5 other helicopters .
The Russian 102nd Military Base , the former 127th Motor Rifle Division , is stationed in Gyumri .
The military alliance of the two nations and , in particular , the presence of Russian troops on Armenian soil has been a key element of Armenia 's national security doctrine since Armenia gained independence in 1991 .
Russia stations an estimated 5,000 soldiers of all types in Armenia , including 3,000 officially reported to be based at the 102nd Military Base .
In 1997 , the two countries signed a far-reaching friendship treaty , which calls for mutual assistance in the event of a military threat to either party and allows Russian border guards to patrol Armenia 's frontiers with Turkey and Iran .
In early 2005 , the 102nd Military Base had 74 tanks , 17 battle infantry vehicles , 148 armored personnel carriers , 84 artillery pieces , 18 MiG-29 fighters , one battery of SA-6 and two batteries of S-300 anti-aircraft missiles .
However in 2005-2007 , following an agreement on the withdrawal of two Russian military bases from Georgia , a great deal of military hardware was moved to the 102nd Base from the Russian 12th Military Base in Batumi and the 62nd Military Base at Akhalkalaki , Georgia .
Russia also supplies weapons at the relatively lower prices of the Russian domestic market as part of a collective security agreement since January 2004 .
According to unconfirmed reports by the Azeri media , Russia has supplied $ 1 billion worth of arms and ammunitions to Armenia in 1996 ; and handed over an additional $ 800 million worth of arms to Armenia in 2008-2009 .
According to AzerNews , the weapons in this latest transfer include 21 tanks , 12 armored vehicles , five other battle machines , a great number of rocket launchers , over 1,050 cases of grenades , nearly 7,900 types of ammunition , 120 grenade launchers , over 4,000 sub-machine guns , TNT fuses , mines of various types , 14 mine-launchers , 9 Grad launchers , five cannons , and other weapons .
Officer training is another sphere of Russian-Armenian military cooperation .
In the first years of sovereignty when Armenia lacked a military educational establishment of its own , officers of its army were trained in Russia .
Even now when Armenia has a military college on its own territory , the Armenian officer corps honors the tradition and is trained at Russian military educational establishments .
600 Armenian servicemen are being trained in Russia .
In Armenia as of 1997 , the training was conducted by the " In the name of Marshal Bagramyan " Training Brigade .
At the first meeting of the joint Russian-Armenian government panel for military-technical cooperation that took place during autumn 2005 , Prime Minister Mikhail Fradkov reported that , Russian factories will participate in the Armenian program of military modernization , and that Russia is prepared to supply the necessary spare parts and equipment .
In accordance with this agreement , Armenia and Russia agreed to work together in exporting weapons and other military equipment to third countries in December 2009 .
The export agreement was signed by Defense Minister Seyran Ohanyan and a visiting senior Russian official , Konstantin Biryulin , during a meeting of a Russian-Armenian inter-governmental commission on bilateral military-technical cooperation .
The agreement envisages the two countries ' interaction in exporting military production to third countries , which will help to strengthen the armed forces of the two states , and further cement the already close Russian-Armenian military cooperation .
A Russian-Armenian defense agreement signed in August 2010 extends Russia’s military presence in Armenia till 2044 and commits Russia to supplying Armenia with modern and compatible weaponry and special military hardware at reduced prices .
At the beginning of 2009 , Azerbaijani media published allegations that Russia had made extensive weapons transfers to Armenia throughout 2008 costing about $ 800 million .
On January 12 , 2009 , the Russian ambassador was invited to the Azerbaijani Ministry of Foreign Affairs and asked about this information .
On January 21 , 2009 , Russian ministry of foreign relations officially denied the transfers .
According to the materials published by WikiLeaks in December 2010 , Azerbaijani defence minister Safar Abiyev claimed that in January 2009 during his visit to Moscow , his Russian counterpart Anatoly Serdyukov unofficially had admitted to weapons transfers " after the second bottle of vodka " that evening , although officially it was denied .
In June 2013 it was revealed that Russia has deployed in Armenia several Iskander-M ballistic missiles systems , which are stationed at undisclosed locations in the country .
On October 7 , 2002 , the Presidents of Armenia , Belarus , Kazakhstan , Kyrgyzstan , Russia and Tajikistan , signed a charter in Tashkent , founding the Collective Security Treaty Organisation ( CSTO ) ( Russian : Организация Договора о Коллективной Безопасности ( ОДКБ~ODKB) ) or simply Ташкентский договор ( The Tashkent Treaty ) .
Nikolai Bordyuzha was appointed secretary general of the new organisation .
On 23 June 2006 , Uzbekistan became a full participant in the CSTO and its membership was formally ratified by its parliament on 28 March 2008 .
Furthermore , the CSTO is an observer organisation at the United Nations General Assembly .
The charter reaffirmed the desire of all participating states to abstain from the use or threat of force .
Signatories would not be able to join other military alliances or other groups of states , while aggression against one signatory would be perceived as an aggression against all .
To this end , the CSTO holds yearly military command exercises for the CSTO nations to have an opportunity to improve inter-organisation cooperation .
The largest-scale CSTO military exercise held , to date , were the " Rubezh 2008 " exercises hosted in Armenia where a combined total of 4,000 troops from all 7 constituent CSTO member countries conducted operative , strategic , and tactical training with an emphasis towards furthering the efficiency of the collective security element of the CSTO partnership .
The Ministry of Defense of Armenia has repeatedly stated that it would expect direct military assistance from the CSTO in case war with Azerbaijan resumes , as recently as December 2009 , Defense Minister Ohanyan made the same statement .
In August 2009 , Nikolay Bordyuzha , the CSTO 's secretary-general , confirmed that official Yerevan can count on such support .
On February 4 , 2009 , an agreement to create the Collective Rapid Reaction Force ( KSOR ) was reached by five of the seven CSTO members , with plans finalized on June 14 , 2009 .
Armenia is one of the five member states .
The force is intended to be used to repulse military aggression , conduct anti-terrorist operations , fight transnational crime and drug trafficking , and neutralize the effects of natural disasters .
Armenia participates in NATO 's Partnership for Peace ( PiP ) program and it is in a NATO organization called Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council ( EAPC ) .
Armenia is in the process of implementation of Individual Partnership Action Plans ( IPAPs ) , which is a program for those countries that have the political will and ability to deepen their relationship with NATO .
Cooperative Best Effort exercise ( the first where Russia was represented ) was run on Armenian territory in 2003 .
Greece is Armenia 's closest ally in NATO and the two cooperate on multiple issues .
A number of Armenian officers are trained in Greece every year , and military aid/material assistance has been provided to Armenia .
In 2003 , the two countries signed a military cooperation accord , under which Greece will increase the number of Armenian servicemen trained at the military and military-medical academies in Athens .
In February 2003 , Armenia sent 34 peace keepers to Kosovo where they became part of the Greek contingent .
Officials in Yerevan have said the Armenian military plans to substantially increase the size of its peace-keeping detachment and counts on Greek assistance to the effort .
In June 2008 , Armenia sent 72 peacekeepers to Kosovo for a total of 106 peacekeepers .
Lithuania has been sharing experience and providing consultations to the Armenian Defense Ministry in the field of democratic control of armed forces , military and defense concepts and public relations since 2002 .
Started in 2004 , Armenian officers have been invited to study at the Lithuanian War Academy and the Baltic Defense College in Tartu , Estonia .
In early 2007 , two Armenian officers for the first time took part in a Baltic lead international exercise , Amber Hope , which was held in Lithuania .
The United States has been steadily upping its military clout in the region .
In early 2003 , United States Department of Defense announced several major military programs in the Caucasus .
Washington 's military aid to Armenia in 2005 amounted to $ 5 million , and in April 2004 , the two sides signed a military-technical cooperation accord .
In late 2004 , Armenia deployed a unit of 46 soldiers , which included bomb-disposal experts , doctors , and transport specialists , to Iraq as part of the American-led Multi-National Force Iraq .
In 2005 , the United States allocated $ 7 million to modernize the military communications of the Armenian Armed Forces .
Since 2003 , Armenia and the Kansas National Guard have exchanged military delegations as part of a National Guard Bureau program to promote better relations between the United States and developing nations .
The program has largely consisted of mutual visits to each other 's countries in an effort to share "ideas and best practices for military and emergency management . "
Armenia is involved in peacekeeping operations in Kosovo and Afghanistan .
There are also debates within the government to send peacekeepers to Lebanon since there are a large number of Armenians living there .
There are 70 Armenian soldiers serving in Kosovo as peacekeepers .
Armenia joined the Kosovo Force in Kosovo in 2004 .
Armenian "blue helmets " serve within the Greek Army battalion .
The relevant memorandum was signed on September 3 , 2003 in Yerevan and ratified by the Armenian Parliament on December 13 , 2003 .
The sixth deployment of Armenian peacekeepers departed for Kosovo on November 14 , 2006 .
In 2008 , the Armenian National Assembly voted unanimously to double the peacekeeping force in Kosovo by sending an extra 34 peacekeepers to the region , increasing the total number of peacekeepers in the region to 68 .
Artur Aghabekian , chairman of the Armenian parliament 's committee on defense and security , cited the need to double the forces to help Kosovo achieve full international recognition adding that that would set an important precedent for the full recognition of the Nagorno-Karabakh Republic .
After the end of the invasion of Iraq , Armenia deployed a unit of 46 peacekeepers under Polish command .
Armenian peacekeepers were based in Al-Kut , 62 miles from the capital of Baghdad .
On July 23 , 2006 the fourth shift of Armenian peacekeepers departed for Iraq .
The shift included 3 staff commanders , 2 medical officers , 10 combat engineers and 31 drivers .
Throughout the length of the deployment , there was one Armenian wounded and no deaths .
The Armenian government extended the small troop presence in Iraq by one year at the end of 2005 and 2006 .
On October 7 , 2008 , Armenia withdrew its contingent of 46 peacekeepers .
This coincided with the withdrawal of the Polish contingent in Iraq .
Armenia deploys 130 soldiers in Afghanistan as part of the NATO-led International Security Assistance Force ( ISAF ) .
They are serving under German command protecting an airport in Konduz .
The Armenian government’s stated efforts to strengthen and reform the military are called into question by continuing non-combat deaths and other violent incidents in the army ranks , which have come under greater public scrutiny in 2010 .
It is very likely that these incidents have some connection with the former Soviet Ground Forces ' phenomenon of dedovshchina ( institutionalised bullying ) .
In a report released in 2012-01-19,Armenian military official site said that 36 Armenian soldiers died in 2011 , and that only 10 of them were shot by Azerbaijani forces .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Throughout history , forms of art have gone through periodic abrupt changes called artistic revolutions .
Movements have come to an end to be replaced by a new movement markedly different in striking ways .
The role of fine art has been to simultaneously express values of the current culture while also offering criticism , balance , or alternatives to any such values that are proving no longer useful .
If changes were abrupt they were deemed revolutions .
The best artists have predated society 's changes due not to any prescIence , but because sensitive perceptivity is part of their 'talent ' of seeing .
Artists have had to 'see ' issues clearly in order to satisfy their current clients , yet not offend potential patrons .
For example , paintings glorified aristocracy in the early 17th century when leadership was needed to nationalize small political groupings , but later as leadership became oppressive , satirization increased and subjects were less concerned with leaders and more with more common plights of mankind .
In its origins and its first golden age , no art owes quite as much to state power as French painting does .
It was in the age of absolute monarchy launched by Louix XIV in the 17th century that the likes of Poussin and Le Brun put France in the forefront of European art .
Versailles found its stately mirror in the powerful idea of classicism – a painting style , enduring in later artists like Ingres , whose austerity and grandeur express the authority of a world where Jove is very much in his throne .
Examples of revolutionary art in conjunction with cultural/political movements :
Here is an example of an Artistic Revolution Piece
Revolutions of style have also abruptly changed the art of a culture .
For example , when the careful , even tedious , art techniques of French neo-classicism became oppressive to artists living in more exuberant times , a stylistic revolution known as " Impressionism " vitalized brush strokes and color .
Edgar Degas , Claude Monet , Pierre-Auguste Renoir burst onto the French culture , effecting a revolution with a style that has become commonplace today .
An artistic revolution can be begun by a single artist , but unless that artist gains some understanding , he becomes an iconoclast .
The first Abstract Expressionists were considered madmen to give up their brushes and rely on the sheer force of energy to leave an image , but then the import of atomic bombs , all atomic energy , became realized , and art found no better way of expressing its power .
Jackson Pollock is the artist best known for starting that revolution .
Key dates : 15000 BC / 400 BC-200AD / 350 AD-450AD
Ancient - There are few remaining examples with early art often favouring drawing over colour .
Work has been found recently in tombs , Egyptian frescoes , pottery and metalwork .
Classical - Relating to or from ancient Roman or Greek architecture and art .
Mainly concerned with geometry and symmetry rather than individual expression .
Byzantine - A religious art characterised by large domes , rounded arches and mosaics from the eastern Roman Empire in the 4th Century .
Medieval - A highly religious art beginning in the 5th Century in Western Europe .
It was characterised by iconographic paintings illustrating scenes from the bible .
Gothic - This style prevailed between the 12th century and the 16th century in Europe .
Mainly an architectural movement , Gothic was characterised by its detailed ornamentation most noticeably the pointed archways and elaborate rib vaulting .
First developed in France , Gothic was intended as a solution to the inadequacies of Romanesque architecture .
It allowed for cathedrals to be built with thinner walls and it became possible to introduce stained glass windows instead of traditional mosaic decorations .
Some of the finest examples of the style include the cathedrals of Chartres , Reims and Amiens .
The term was also used to describe sculpture and painting that demonstrated a greater degree of naturalism .
This movement began in Italy in the 14th century and the term , literally meaning rebirth , describes the revival of interest in the artistic achievements of the Classical world .
Initially in a literary revival Renaissance was determined to move away from the religion-dominated Middle Ages and to turn its attention to the plight of the individual man in society .
It was a time when individual expression and worldly experience became two of the main themes of Renaissance art .
The movement owed a lot to the increasing sophistication of society , characterised by political stability , economic growth and cosmopolitanism .
Education blossomed at this time , with libraries and academies allowing more thorough research to be conducted into the culture of the antique world .
In addition , the arts benefited from the patronage of such influential groups as the Medici family of Florence , the Sforza family of Milan and Popes Julius II and Leo X .
The works of Petrarch first displayed the new interest in the intellectual values of the Classical world in the early 14th century and the romance of this era as rediscovered in the Renaissance period can be seen expressed by Boccaccio .
Leonardo da Vinci was the archetypal Renaissance man representing the humanistic values of the period in his art , science and writing .
Michelangelo and Raphael were also vital figures in this movement , producing works regarded for centuries as embodying the classical notion of perfection .
Many of these artists came from Florence and it remained an important centre for the Renaissance into the 16th century eventually to be overtaken by Rome and Venice .
Some of the ideas of the Italian Renaissance did spread to other parts of Europe , for example to the German artist Albrecht Dürer of the ' Northern Renaissance ' .
But by the 1500s Mannerism had overtaken the Renaissance and it was this style that caught on in Europe .
Leonardo da Vinci , Sandro Botticelli , Filippo Brunelleschi , Raphael da Urbino , Titian , Michelangelo Buonarroti , and Donatello Bardi .
Artists of the Early Renaissance and the High Renaissance developed their characteristic styles from the observation of nature and the formulation of a pictorial science .
When Mannerism matured after 1520( The year Raphael died ) , all the representational problems had been solved .
A body of knowledge was there to be learned .
Instead of nature as their teacher , Mannerist artists took art .
While Renaissance artists sought nature to find their style , the Mannerists looked first for a style and found a manner .
In Mannerist paintings , compositions can have no focal point , space can be ambiguous , figures can be characterized by an athletic bending and twisting with distortions , exaggerations , an elastic elongation of the limbs , bizarre posturing on one hand , graceful posturing on the other hand , and a rendering of the heads as uniformly small and oval .
The composition is jammed by clashing colors , which is unlike what we 've seen in the balanced , natural , and dramatic colors of the High Renaissance .
There is also a fondness for allegories that have lascivious undertones .
Baroque Art emerged in Europe around 1600 , as a reaction against the intricate and formulaic Mannerist style which dominated the Late Renaissance .
Baroque Art is less complex , more realistic and more emotionally affecting than Mannerism .
This movement was encouraged by the Catholic Church , the most important patron of the arts at that time , as a return to tradition and spirituality .
One of the great periods of art history , Baroque Art was developed by Caravaggio , Annibale Carracci , and Gianlorenzo Bernini , among others .
This was also the age of Rubens , Rembrandt , Velázquez , and Vermeer .
In the 18th century , Baroque Art was replaced by the more elegant and elaborate Rococo style .
Caravaggio , Annibale Carracci , Gianlorenzo Bernini , Rubens , Rembrandt , Nicolas Poussin
Throughout the 18th century in France , a new wealthy and influential middle-class was beginning to rise , even though the royalty and nobility continued to be patrons of the arts .
Upon the death of Louis XIV and the abandonment of Versailles , the Paris high society became the purveyors of style .
This style , primarily used in interior decoration , came to be called Rococo .
The term Rococo was derived from the French word "rocaille" , which means pebbles and refers to the stones and shells used to decorate the interiors of caves .
Therefore , shell forms became the principal motif in Rococo .
The society women competed for the best and most elaborate decorations for their houses .
Hence the Rococo style was highly dominated by the feminine taste and influence .
François Boucher was the 18th century painter and engraver whose works are regarded as the perfect expression of French taste in the Rococo period .
Trained by his father who was a lace designer , Boucher won fame with his sensuous and light-hearted mythological paintings and landscapes .
He executed important works for both the Queen of France and Mme . de Pompadour , Louis XV 's mistress , who was considered the most powerful woman in France at the time .
Boucher was Mme . de Pompadour 's favorite artist and was commissioned by her for numerous paintings and decorations .
Boucher also became the principal designer for the royal porcelain factory and the director of the Gobelins tapestry factory .
The Vulcan Presenting Venus with Arms for Aeneas is a template for a tapestry made by this factory .
Characterized by elegant and refined yet playful subject matters , Boucher 's style became the epitome of the court of Louis XV.
His style consisted of delicate colors and gentle forms painted within a frivolous subject matter .
His works typically utilized delightful and decorative designs to illustrate graceful stories with Arcadian shepherds , goddesses and cupids playing against a pink and blue sky .
These works mirrored the frolicsome , artificial and ornamented decadence of the French aristocracy of the time .
The Rococo is sometimes considered a final phase of the Baroque period .
François Boucher , William Hogarth , Giovanni Battista Tiepolo , Angelica Kauffman , Giovanni Antonio Canaletto , Velázquez Vermeer
A nineteenth-century French art style and movement that originated as a reaction to the Baroque .
It sought to revive the ideals of ancient Greek and Roman art .
Neoclassic artists used classical forms to express their ideas about courage , sacrifice , and love of country .
Jacques-Louis David , Sir Henry Raeburn , Sir Joshua Reynolds , Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres , Thomas Gainsborough , Antonio Canova , Arnold Bocklin
Romanticism was basically a reaction against Neoclassicism , it is a deeply felt style which is individualistic , beautiful , exotic , and emotionally wrought .
Although Romanticism and Neoclassicism were philosophically opposed , they were the dominant European styles for generations , and many artists were affected to a greater or lesser degree by both .
Artists might work in both styles at different times or even mix the styles , creating an intellectually Romantic work using a Neoclassical visual style , for example .
Great artists closely associated with Romanticism include J.M.W. Turner , Caspar David Friedrich , John Constable , and William Blake .
In the United States , the leading Romantic movement was the Hudson River School of dramatic landscape painting .
Obvious successors of Romanticism include the Pre-Raphaelite movement and the Symbolists .
But Impressionism , and through it almost all of 20th-century art , is also firmly rooted in the Romantic tradition .
George Stubbs , William Blake , John Martin , Francisco Goya , Sir Thomas Lawrence , John Constable , Eugène Delacroix , Sir Edwin landseer , Caspar David Friedrich , JMW Turner
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Ashoka Maurya ( ) , ( 304–232 BCE) , commonly known as Ashoka and also as Ashoka the Great , was an Indian emperor of the Maurya Dynasty who ruled almost all of the Indian subcontinent from ca . 269 BCE to 232 BCE.
One of India 's greatest emperors , Ashoka reigned over most of present-day India after a number of military conquests .
His empire stretched from eastern Iran in the West , through the Hindu Kush mountains towards Assam in the East and covered the entire Indian subcontinent except parts of present day Tamil Nadu and parts of Kerala .
The empire had Taxila , Ujjain and Pataliputra as its capital .
In about 260 BCE Ashoka waged a bitterly destructive war against the state of Kalinga ( modern Odisha ) .
He conquered Kalinga , which none of his ancestors ( starting from Chandragupta Maurya ) had done .
His reign was headquartered in Magadha ( present-day Bihar ) .
He embraced Buddhism after witnessing the mass deaths of the Kalinga War , which he himself had waged out of a desire for conquest .
" Ashoka reflected on the war in Kalinga , which reportedly had resulted in more than 100,000 deaths and 150,000 deportations . "
Ashoka converted gradually to Buddhism beginning about 263 BCE at the latest .
He was later dedicated to the propagation of Buddhism across Asia , and established monuments marking several significant sites in the life of Gautama Buddha .
" Ashoka regarded Buddhism as a doctrine that could serve as a cultural foundation for political unity . "
Ashoka is now remembered as a philanthropic administrator .
In the Kalinga edicts , he addresses his people as his " children" , and mentions that as a father he desires their good .
Ashoka is referred to as " Samraat Chakravartin Ashoka " – the " Emperor of Emperors Ashoka . "
His name " " means "painless , without sorrow " in Sanskrit ( the " a " privativum and " śoka " "pain , distress " ) .
In his edicts , he is referred to as ' ( Pali ' or " The Beloved of the Gods " ) , and ' ( Pali ' or " He who regards everyone with affection " ) .
His fondness for his name 's connection to the Saraca asoca tree , or the " Asoka tree " is also referenced in the Ashokavadana .
Wells wrote of Ashoka in his book " The Outline of History " : " Amidst the tens of thousands of names of monarchs that crowd the columns of history , their majesties and graciousnesses and serenities and royal highnesses and the like , the name of Asoka shines , and shines , almost alone , a star . "
Along with the Edicts of Ashoka , his legend is related in the 2nd-century " Ashokavadana " ( "" Narrative of Asoka" , " a part of " Divyavadana" ) , and in the Sri Lankan text " Mahavamsa " ( "" Great Chronicle " " ) .
The emblem of the modern Republic of India is an adaptation of the Lion Capital of Ashoka .
Ashoka was born to the Mauryan emperor Bindusara and a relatively lower ranked wife of his , Dharmā Dhammā .
He was the grandson of Chandragupta Maurya , founder of Mauryan dynasty .
The Avadana texts mention that his mother was queen Subhadrangī .
According to Ashokavadana , she was the daughter of a Brahmin from the city of Champa .
Empress Subhadrangī was a Brahmin of the Ajivika sect , and was found to be a suitable match for Emperor Bindusara .
Though a palace intrigue kept her away from the emperor , this eventually ended , and she bore a son .
It is from her exclamation " I am now without sorrow , " that Ashoka got his name .
The " Divyāvadāna " tells a similar story , but gives the name of the queen as Janapadakalyānī .
Ashoka had several elder siblings , all of whom were his half-brothers from other wives of Bindusara .
His fighting qualities were apparent from an early age and he was given royal military training .
He was known as a fearsome hunter , and according to a legend , killed a lion with just a wooden rod .
Because of his reputation as a frightening warrior and a heartless general , he was sent to curb the riots in the Avanti province of the Mauryan empire .
The Buddhist text " Divyavadana " describes Ashoka putting down a revolt due to activities of wicked ministers .
This may have been an incident in Bindusara 's times .
Taranatha 's account states that Chanakya , one of Bindusara 's great lords , destroyed the nobles and kings of 16 towns and made himself the master of all territory between the eastern and the western seas .
Some historians consider this as an indication of Bindusara 's conquest of the Deccan while others consider it as suppression of a revolt .
Following this , Ashoka was stationed at Ujjayini as governor .
Bindusara 's death in 273 BCE led to a war over succession .
According to Divyavandana , Bindusara wanted his son Sushim to succeed him but Ashoka was supported by his father 's ministers , who found Sushim to be arrogant and disrespectful towards them .
A minister named Radhagupta seems to have played an important role in Ashoka 's rise to the throne .
The Ashokavadana recounts Radhagupta 's offering of an old royal elephant to Ashoka for him to ride to the Garden of the Gold Pavilion where King Bindusara would determine his successor .
Ashoka later got rid of the legitimate heir to the throne by tricking him into entering a pit filled with live coals .
Radhagupta , according to the Ashokavadana , would later be appointed prime minister by Ashoka once he had gained the throne .
The " Dipavansa " and " Mahavansa " refer to Ashoka 's killing 99 of his brothers , sparing only one , named Vitashoka or Tissa , although there is no clear proof about this incident ( many such accounts are saturated with mythological elements ) .
The coronation happened in 269 BCE , four years after his succession to the throne .
Buddhist legends state that Ashoka was of a wicked nature and bad temper .
He also built Ashoka 's Hell , an elaborate torture chamber , deemed the " Paradisal Hell " because of its beautiful exterior contrasted with the acts carried out inside by his appointed executioner Girikaa , which earned him the name of " çanḍa Ashoka " or " Chandaashoka , " meaning " Ashoka the Fierce " in Sanskrit .
Professor Charles Drekmeier cautions that the Buddhist legends intend to dramatise the change that Buddhism wrought in him , and therefore , exaggerate Ashoka 's past wickedness and his piousness after the conversion .
Ascending the throne , Ashoka expanded his empire over the next eight years , from the present-day boundaries Assam in the East to Iran in the West ; from the Pamir Knot in the north to the peninsula of southern India except for present day Tamil Nadu and Kerala which were ruled by the three ancient Tamil kingdoms .
While the early part of Ashoka 's reign was apparently quite bloodthirsty , he became a follower of the Buddha 's teachings after his conquest of Kalinga on the east coast of India in the present-day states of Odisha and North Coastal Andhra Pradesh .
Kalinga was a state that prided itself on its sovereignty and democracy .
With its monarchical parliamentary democracy it was quite an exception in ancient Bharata where there existed the concept of Rajdharma .
Rajdharma means the duty of the rulers , which was intrinsically entwined with the concept of bravery and dharma .
The Kalinga War happened eight years after his coronation .
From his 13th inscription , we come to know that the battle was a massive one and caused the deaths of more than 100,000 soldiers and many civilians who rose up in defence ; over 150,000 were deported .
When he was walking through the grounds of Kalinga after his conquest , rejoicing in his victory , he was moved by the number of bodies strewn there and the wails of the kith and kin of the dead .
Edict 13 on the Edicts of Ashoka Rock Inscriptions reflect the great remorse the king felt after observing the destruction of Kalinga :
The Edict goes on to address the even greater degree of sorrow and regret resulting from Ashoka 's understanding that the friends and families of deceased would suffer greatly too .
Legend says that one day after the war was over , Ashoka ventured out to roam the city and all he could see were burnt houses and scattered corpses .
This sight made him sick and he cried the famous monologue :
The lethal war with Kalinga transformed the vengeful Emperor Ashoka to a stable and peaceful emperor and he embraced Buddhism .
This led to the expansion of Buddhism in the Mauryan empire and other kingdoms during his rule , and worldwide from about 250 BCE.
Prominent in this cause were his son Mahinda ( Mahendra ) and daughter Sanghamitra ( whose name means "friend of the Sangha" ) , who established Buddhism in Ceylon ( now Sri Lanka ) .
Legend states that during his cremation , his body burned for seven days and nights .
After his death , the Mauryan dynasty lasted just fifty more years until his empire stretched over almost all of the Indian subcontinent .
Ashoka had many wives and children , but many of their names are lost to time .
His supreme consort and first wife was Vidisha Mahadevi Shakyakumari Asandhimitra .
Mahindra and Sanghamitra were twins born by her , in the city of Ujjain .
He had entrusted to them the job of making Buddhism more popular across the known and the unknown world .
Mahindra and Sanghamitra went into Sri Lanka and converted the King , the Queen and their people to Buddhism .
In his old age , he seems to have come under the spell of his youngest wife Tishyaraksha .
It is said that she had got Ashoka 's son Kunala , the regent in Takshashila and the heir presumptive to the throne , blinded by a wily stratagem .
The official executioners spared Kunala and he became a wandering singer accompanied by his favourite wife Kanchanmala .
In Pataliputra , Ashoka heard Kunala 's song , and realised that Kunala 's misfortune may have been a punishment for some past sin of the emperor himself .
He condemned Tishyaraksha to death , restoring Kunala to the court .
In the Ashokavadana , Kunala is portrayed as forgiving Tishyaraksha , having obtained enlightenment through Buddhist practice .
While he urges Ashoka to forgive her as well , Ashoka does not respond with the same forgiveness .
Kunala was succeeded by his son , Samprati , but his rule did not last long after Ashoka 's death .
The reign of Ashoka Maurya might have disappeared into history as the ages passed by , had he not left behind records of his reign .
These records are in the form of sculpted pillars and rocks inscribed with a variety of actions and teachings he wished to be published under his name .
In the year 185 BCE , about fifty years after Ashoka 's death , the last Maurya ruler , Brihadratha , was assassinated by the commander-in-chief of the Mauryan armed forces , Pusyamitra Sunga , while he was taking the Guard of Honor of his forces .
Pusyamitra Sunga founded the Sunga dynasty ( 185 BCE-78 BCE ) and ruled just a fragmented part of the Mauryan Empire .
Many of the northwestern territories of the Mauryan Empire ( modern-day Afghanistan and Northern Pakistan ) became the Indo-Greek Kingdom .
In 2001 , a semi-fictionalized portrayal of Ashoka 's life was produced as a motion picture under the title " Asoka" .
King Ashoka , the third monarch of the Indian Mauryan dynasty , has come to be regarded as one of the most exemplary rulers in world history .
One of the more enduring legacies of Ashoka Maurya was the model that he provided for the relationship between Buddhism and the state .
Throughout Theravada Southeastern Asia , the model of rulership embodied by Ashoka replaced the notion of divine kingship that had previously dominated ( in the Angkor kingdom , for instance ) .
Under this model of ' Buddhist kingship' , the king sought to legitimise his rule not through descent from a divine source , but by supporting and earning the approval of the Buddhist " sangha" .
Following Ashoka 's example , kings established monasteries , funded the construction of stupas , and supported the ordination of monks in their kingdom .
Many rulers also took an active role in resolving disputes over the status and regulation of the sangha , as Ashoka had in calling a conclave to settle a number of contentious issues during his reign .
This development ultimately lead to a close association in many Southeast Asian countries between the monarchy and the religious hierarchy , an association that can still be seen today in the state-supported Buddhism of Thailand and the traditional role of the Thai king as both a religious and secular leader .
Ashoka also said that all his courtiers always governed the people in a moral manner .
According to the legends mentioned in the 2nd-century CE text " Ashokavadana" , Asoka was not non-violent after adopting Buddhism .
In one instance , a non-Buddhist in Pundravardhana drew a picture showing the Buddha bowing at the feet of Nirgrantha Jnatiputra ( identified with Mahavira , the founder of Jainism ) .
On complaint from a Buddhist devotee , Asoka issued an order to arrest him , and subsequently , another order to kill all the Ajivikas in Pundravardhana .
Around 18,000 followers of the Ajivika sect were executed as a result of this order .
Sometime later , another Nirgrantha follower in Pataliputra drew a similar picture .
Asoka burnt him and his entire family alive in their house .
He also announced an award of one dinara ( silver coin ) to anyone who brought him the head of a Nirgrantha heretic .
According to " Ashokavadana" , as a result of this order , his own brother was mistaken for a heretic and killed by a cowherd .
These stories of persecutions of rival sects by Ashoka appear to be a clear fabrication arising out of sectarian propaganda .
Ashoka was almost forgotten by the historians of the early British India , but James Prinsep contributed in the revelation of historical sources .
Another important historian was British archaeologist John Hubert Marshall , who was director-General of the Archaeological Survey of India .
His main interests were Sanchi and Sarnath , in addition to Harappa and Mohenjodaro .
Sir Alexander Cunningham , a British archaeologist and army engineer , and often known as the father of the Archaeological Survey of India , unveiled heritage sites like the Bharhut Stupa , Sarnath , Sanchi , and the Mahabodhi Temple .
Mortimer Wheeler , a British archaeologist , also exposed Ashokan historical sources , especially the Taxila .
Information about the life and reign of Ashoka primarily comes from a relatively small number of Buddhist sources .
In particular , the Sanskrit " Ashokavadana " ( 'Story of Ashoka' ) , written in the 2nd century , and the two Pāli chronicles of Sri Lanka ( the Dipavamsa and Mahavamsa ) provide most of the currently known information about Ashoka .
Additional information is contributed by the Edicts of Asoka , whose authorship was finally attributed to the Ashoka of Buddhist legend after the discovery of dynastic lists that gave the name used in the edicts ( " Priyadarsi " – ' He who regards everyone with affection') as a title or additional name of Ashoka Maurya .
Architectural remains of his period have been found at Kumhrar , Patna , which include an 80-pillar hypostyle hall .
Edicts of Ashoka -The Edicts of Ashoka are a collection of 33 inscriptions on the Pillars of Ashoka , as well as boulders and cave walls , made by Ashoka during his reign .
These inscriptions are dispersed throughout modern-day Pakistan and India , and represent the first tangible evidence of Buddhism .
The edicts describe in detail the first wide expansion of Buddhism through the sponsorship of one of the most powerful kings of Indian history , offering more information about Ashoka 's proselytism , moral precepts , religious precepts , and his notions of social and animal welfare .
Ashokavadana – The Ashokavadana is a 2nd-century CE text related to the legend of Ashoka .
The legend was translated into Chinese by Fa Hien in 300 CE.
It is essentially a Hinayana text , and its world is that of Mathura and North-west India .
The emphasis of this little known text is on exploring the relationship between the king and the community of monks ( the Sangha ) and setting up an ideal of religious life for the laity ( the common man ) by telling appealing stories about religious exploits .
The most startling feature is that Ashoka’s conversion has nothing to do with the Kalinga war , which is not even mentioned , nor is there a word about his belonging to the Maurya dynasty .
Equally surprising is the record of his use of state power to spread Buddhism in an uncompromising fashion .
The legend of Veetashoka provides insights into Ashoka’s character that are not available in the widely known Pali records .
Mahavamsa -The Mahavamsa ( " Great Chronicle " ) is a historical poem written in the Pali language of the kings of Sri Lanka .
It covers the period from the coming of King Vijaya of Kalinga ( ancient Odisha ) in 543 BCE to the reign of King Mahasena ( 334–361 ) .
As it often refers to the royal dynasties of India , the Mahavamsa is also valuable for historians who wish to date and relate contemporary royal dynasties in the Indian subcontinent .
It is very important in dating the consecration of Ashoka .
Dipavamsa -The Dipavamsa , or " Deepavamsa" , ( i .e . , Chronicle of the Island , in Pali ) is the oldest historical record of Sri Lanka .
The chronicle is believed to be compiled from Atthakatha and other sources around the 3rd or 4th century .
King Dhatusena ( 4th century CE ) had ordered that the Dipavamsa be recited at the Mahinda festival held annually in Anuradhapura .
The use of Buddhist sources in reconstructing the life of Ashoka has had a strong influence on perceptions of Ashoka , as well as the interpretations of his Edicts .
Building on traditional accounts , early scholars regarded Ashoka as a primarily Buddhist monarch who underwent a conversion to Buddhism and was actively engaged in sponsoring and supporting the Buddhist monastic institution .
Some scholars have tended to question this assessment .
The only source of information not attributable to Buddhist sources are the Ashokan Edicts , and these do not explicitly state that Ashoka was a Buddhist .
In his edicts , Ashoka expresses support for all the major religions of his time : Buddhism , Brahmanism , Jainism , and Ajivikaism , and his edicts addressed to the population at large ( there are some addressed specifically to Buddhists ; this is not the case for the other religions ) generally focus on moral themes members of all the religions would accept .
However , there is strong evidence in the edicts alone that he was a Buddhist .
In one edict he belittles rituals , and he banned Vedic animal sacrifices ; these strongly suggest that he at least did not look to the Vedic tradition for guidance .
Furthermore , there are many edicts expressed to Buddhists alone ; in one , Ashoka declares himself to be an "upasaka" , and in another he demonstrates a close familiarity with Buddhist texts .
He erected rock pillars at Buddhist holy sites , but did not do so for the sites of other religions .
He also used the word "dhamma " to refer to qualities of the heart that underlie moral action ; this was an exclusively Buddhist use of the word .
Finally , the ideals he promotes correspond to the first three steps of the Buddha 's graduated discourse .
Interestingly , the Ashokavadana presents an alternate view of the familiar Ashoka ; one in which his conversion does not have anything to do with the Kalinga war or about his descent from the Maurya dynasty .
Instead , Ashoka 's reason for adopting non-violence appears much more personal .
The Ashokavadana shows that the main source of Ashoka 's conversion and the acts of welfare that followed are rooted instead in intense personal anguish at its core , from a wellspring inside himself ( not so much necessarily spurred by a specific event ) .
It thereby illuminates Ashoka as more humanly ambitious and passionate , with both greatness and flaws .
" This " Ashoka is very different from the " shadowy do-gooder " of later Pali chronicles .
Much of the knowledge about Ashoka comes from the several inscriptions that he had carved on pillars and rocks throughout the empire .
All his inscriptions present him as compassionate loving .
In the Kalinga rock edits , he addresses his people as his " children " and mentions that as a father he desires their good .
These inscriptions promoted Buddhist morality and encouraged nonviolence and adherence to dharma ( duty or proper behaviour ) , and they talk of his fame and conquered lands as well as the neighbouring kingdoms holding up his might .
One also gets some primary information about the Kalinga War and Ashoka 's allies plus some useful knowledge on the civil administration .
The Ashoka Pillar at Sarnath is the most notable of the relics left by Ashoka .
Made of sandstone , this pillar records the visit of the emperor to Sarnath , in the 3rd century BCE.
It has a four-lion capital ( four lions standing back to back ) which was adopted as the emblem of the modern Indian republic .
The lion symbolises both Ashoka 's imperial rule and the kingship of the Buddha .
In translating these monuments , historians learn the bulk of what is assumed to have been true fact of the Mauryan Empire .
It is difficult to determine whether or not some actual events ever happened , but the stone etchings clearly depict how Ashoka wanted to be thought of and remembered .
Recently scholarly analysis determined that the three major foci of debate regarding Ashoka involve the nature of the Maurya empire ; the extent and impact of Ashoka 's pacifism , and what is referred to in the Inscriptions as "dhamma " or dharma , which connotes goodness , virtue , and charity .
Some historians have argued that Ashoka 's pacifism undermined the "military backbone " of the Maurya empire , while others have suggested that the extent and impact of his pacifism have been "grossly exaggerated .
The "dhamma " of the Edicts has been understood as concurrently a Buddhist lay ethic , a set of politico-moral ideas , a " sort of universal religion , " or as an Ashokan innovation .
On the other hand , it has also been interpreted as an "essentially political " ideology that sought to knit together a vast and diverse empire .
Scholars are still attempting to analyse both the expressed and implied political ideas of the Edicts ( particularly in regard to imperial vision ) , and make inferences pertaining to how that vision was grappling with problems and political realities of a "virtually subcontinental , and culturally and economically highly variegated , 3rd century BCE Indian empire .
Nonetheless , it remains clear that Ashoka 's Inscriptions represent the earliest corpus of royal inscriptions in the Indian subcontinent , and therefore prove to be a very important innovation in royal practices .
As a Buddhist emperor , Ashoka believed that Buddhism is beneficial for all human beings as well as animals and plants , so he built a number of stupas , Sangharama , viharas , chaitya , and residences for Buddhist monks all over South Asia and Central Asia .
According to the Ashokavadana , he ordered the construction of 84,000 stupas to house the Buddhas relics .
In the Aryamanjusrimulakalpa , Ashoka takes offerings to each of these stupas traveling in a chariot adorned with precious metals .
He sent his only daughter Sanghamitra and son Mahindra to spread Buddhism in Sri Lanka ( then known as Tamraparni ) .
Ashoka also sent many prominent Buddhist monks ( bhikshus ) Sthaviras like Madhyamik Sthavira to modern Kashmir and Afghanistan ; Maharaskshit Sthavira to Syria , Persia / Iran , Egypt , Greece , Italy and Turkey ; Massim Sthavira to Nepal , Bhutan , China and Mongolia ; Sohn Uttar Sthavira to modern Cambodia , Laos , Burma ( old name Suvarnabhumi for Burma and Thailand ) , Thailand and Vietnam ; Mahadhhamarakhhita stahvira to Maharashtra ( old name Maharatthha ) ; Maharakhhit Sthavira and Yavandhammarakhhita Sthavira to South India .
Ashoka also invited Buddhists and non-Buddhists for religious conferences .
He inspired the Buddhist monks to compose the sacred religious texts , and also gave all types of help to that end .
Ashoka also helped to develop viharas ( intellectual hubs ) such as Nalanda and Taxila .
Ashoka helped to construct Sanchi and Mahabodhi Temple .
As his reign continued his even-handedness was replaced with special inclination towards Buddhism .
Ashoka helped and respected both Sramans ( Buddhists monks ) and Brahmins ( Vedic monks ) .
Ashoka also helped to organise the Third Buddhist council ( c .
It was conducted by the monk Moggaliputta-Tissa who was the spiritual teacher of the Mauryan Emperor Ashoka . "
It is well known that Ashoka sent "dütas " or emissaries to convey messages or letters , written or oral ( rather both ) , to various people .
The VIth Rock Edict about "oral orders " reveals this .
It was later confirmed that it was not unusual to add oral messages to written ones , and the content of Ashoka 's messages can be inferred likewise from the XIIIth Rock Edict : They were meant to spread his "dhammavijaya , " which he considered the highest victory and which he wished to propagate everywhere ( including far beyond India ) .
There is obvious and undeniable trace of cultural contact through the adoption of the Kharosthi script , and the idea of installing inscriptions might have travelled with this script , as Achaemenid influence is seem in some of the formulations used by Ashoka in his inscriptions .
This indicates to us that Ashoka was indeed in contact with other cultures , and was an active part in mingling and spreading new cultural ideas beyond his own immediate walls .
In his edicts , Ashoka mentions some of the people living in Hellenic countries as converts to Buddhism , although no Hellenic historical record of this event remain :
It is not too farfetched to imagine , however , that Ashoka received letters from Greek rulers and was acquainted with the Hellenistic royal orders in the same way as he perhaps knew of the inscriptions of the Achaemenid kings , given the presence of ambassadors of Hellenistic kings in India ( as well as the "dütas " sent by Ashoka himself ) .
The Greeks in India even seem to have played an active role in the propagation of Buddhism , as some of the emissaries of Ashoka , such as Dharmaraksita , are described in Pali sources as leading Greek ( Yona ) Buddhist monks , active in spreading Buddhism ( the Mahavamsa , XII ) .
Ashoka 's military power was strong , but after his conversion to Buddhism , he maintained friendly relations with three major Tamil kingdoms in the South namely Cheras , Cholas and Pandyas , the post Alexandrian empire , Tamraparni , and Suvarnabhumi .
His edicts state that he made provisions for medical treatment of humans and animals in his own kingdom as well as in these neighbouring states .
He also had wells dug and trees planted along the roads for the benefit of the common people .
Ashoka banned the slaughter and eating of the common cattle , and also imposed restrictions on fishing and fish-eating .
He also abolished the royal hunting of animals and restricted the slaying of animals for food in the royal residence .
Because he banned hunting , created many veterinary clinics and eliminated meat eating on many holidays , the Mauryan Empire under Ashoka has been described as "one of the very few instances in world history of a government treating its animals as citizens who are as deserving of its protection as the human residents . "
The Ashoka Chakra ( the wheel of Ashoka ) is a depiction of the Dharmachakra ( see Dharmacakra ) or Dhammachakka in Pali , the Wheel of Dharma ( Sanskrit : Chakra means wheel ) .
The wheel has 24 spokes which represent the 12 Laws of Dependent Origination and the 12 Laws of Dependent Termination .
The Ashoka Chakra has been widely inscribed on many relics of the Mauryan Emperor , most prominent among which is the Lion Capital of Sarnath and The Ashoka Pillar .
The most visible use of the Ashoka Chakra today is at the centre of the National flag of the Republic of India (adopted on 22 July 1947 ) , where it is rendered in a Navy-blue color on a White background , by replacing the symbol of Charkha ( Spinning wheel ) of the pre-independence versions of the flag .
The Ashoka Chakra can also been seen on the base of Lion Capital of Ashoka which has been adopted as the National Emblem of India .
The Ashoka Chakra was built by Ashoka during his reign .
Chakra is a Sanskrit word which also means " cycle " or " self-repeating process . "
The process it signifies is the cycle of time - as in how the world changes with time .
A few days before India became independent on August 1947 , the specially formed Constituent Assembly decided that the flag of India must be acceptable to all parties and communities .
A flag with three colours , Saffron , White and Green with the Ashoka Chakra was selected .
The pillars of Ashoka are a series of columns dispersed throughout the northern Indian subcontinent , and erected by Ashoka during his reign in the 3rd century BCE.
Originally , there must have been many pillars of Ashoka although only ten with inscriptions still survive .
Averaging between forty and fifty feet in height , and weighing up to fifty tons each , all the pillars were quarried at Chunar , just south of Varanasi and dragged , sometimes hundreds of miles , to where they were erected .
The first Pillar of Ashoka was found in the 16th century by Thomas Coryat in the ruins of ancient Delhi .
The wheel represents the sun time and Buddhist law , while the swastika stands for the cosmic dance around a fixed center and guards against evil .
There is no evidence of a swastika , or manji , on the pillars .
The Lion capital of Ashoka is a sculpture of four " Indian lions " standing back to back .
It was originally placed atop the Aśoka pillar at Sarnath , now in the state of Uttar Pradesh , India .
The pillar , sometimes called the Aśoka Column is still in its original location , but the Lion Capital is now in the Sarnath Museum .
This Lion Capital of Ashoka from Sarnath has been adopted as the National Emblem of India and the wheel " Ashoka Chakra " from its base was placed onto the center of the National Flag of India .
The capital contains four lions ( Indian / Asiatic Lions ) , standing back to back , mounted on an abacus , with a frieze carrying sculptures in high relief of an elephant , a galloping horse , a bull , and a lion , separated by intervening spoked chariot-wheels over a bell-shaped lotus .
Carved out of a single block of polished sandstone , the capital was believed to be crowned by a ' Wheel of Dharma' ( Dharmachakra popularly known in India as the " Ashoka Chakra" ) .
The Ashoka Lion capital or the Sarnath lion capital is also known as the national symbol of India .
The Sarnath pillar bears one of the Edicts of Ashoka , an inscription against division within the Buddhist community , which reads , " No one shall cause division in the order of monks . "
The Sarnath pillar is a column surmounted by a capital , which consists of a canopy representing an inverted bell-shaped lotus flower , a short cylindrical abacus with four 24-spoked Dharma wheels with four animals ( an elephant , a bull , a horse , a lion ) .
The four animals in the Sarnath capital are believed to symbolise different steps of Lord Buddha 's life .
Besides the religious interpretations , there are some non-religious interpretations also about the symbolism of the Ashoka capital pillar at Sarnath .
According to them , the four lions symbolise Ashoka 's rule over the four directions , the wheels as symbols of his enlightened rule ( Chakravartin ) and the four animals as symbols of four adjoining territories of India .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Arianism is the theological teaching attributed to Arius ( c .
AD 250–336) , a Christian presbyter in Alexandria , Egypt , concerning the relationship of God the Father to the Son of God , Jesus Christ .
Arius asserted that the Son of God was a subordinate entity to God the Father .
Deemed a heretic by the Ecumenical First Council of Nicaea of 325 , Arius was later exonerated in 335 at the regional First Synod of Tyre , and then , after his death , pronounced a heretic again at the Ecumenical First Council of Constantinople of 381 .
The Roman Emperors Constantius II ( 337–361 ) and Valens ( 364–378 ) were Arians or Semi-Arians .
The Arian concept of Christ is that the Son of God did not always exist , but was created by—and is therefore distinct from—God the Father .
This belief is grounded in the Gospel of John ( ) " passage : " You heard me say , ' I am going away and I am coming back to you . '
If you loved me , you would be glad that I am going to the Father , for the Father is greater than I.
Arianism is defined as those teachings attributed to Arius , supported by the Council of Rimini , which are in opposition to the post-Nicaean Trinitarian Christological doctrine , as determined by the first two Ecumenical Councils and currently maintained by the Roman Catholic Church , the Eastern Orthodox Church , the Oriental Orthodox Churches , the Assyrian Church of the East , all Reformation-founded Protestant churches ( Lutheran , Reformed/Presbyterian , and Anglican ) , and a large majority of groups founded after the Reformation and calling themselves Protestant ( such as Methodist , Baptist , most Pentecostals ) .
Modern Christian groups which may be seen as espousing some of the principles of Arianism include Unitarians , Oneness Pentecostals , Members Church of God International , The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints , Iglesia ni Cristo and Branhamism , though the origins of their beliefs are not necessarily attributed to the teachings of Arius .
" Arianism " is also often used to refer to other nontrinitarian theological systems of the 4th century , which regarded Jesus Christ—the Son of God , the Logos—as either a created being ( as in Arianism proper and Anomoeanism ) , or as neither uncreated nor created in the sense other beings are created ( as in Semi-Arianism ) .
Arius taught that God the Father and the Son of God did not always exist together eternally .
Arians taught that the Logos was a divine being created by God the Father before the world .
The Son of God is subordinate to God the Father .
In English-language works , it is sometimes said that Arians believe that Jesus is or was a " creature" , in the sense of " created being" .
Arius and his followers appealed to Bible verses such as Jesus saying that the father is "greater than I " ( John ) , and " The LORD/Yahweh created me at the beginning of his work " ( Proverbs ) .
Controversy over Arianism arose in the late 3rd century and persisted throughout most of the 4th century .
It involved most church members—from simple believers , priests and monks to bishops , emperors and members of Rome 's imperial family .
Such a deep controversy within the Church during this period of its development could not have materialized without significant historical influences providing a basis for the Arian doctrines .
Some historians define and minimize the Arian conflict as the exclusive construct of Arius and a handful of rogue bishops engaging in heresy ; but others recognize Arius as a defender of 'original ' Christianity , or as providing a conservative response against the politicization of Christianity seeking union with the Roman Empire .
Of the roughly three hundred bishops in attendance at the Council of Nicea , only two bishops did not sign the Nicene Creed , which condemned Arianism .
Two Roman emperors , Constantius II and Valens , became Arians , as did prominent Gothic , Vandal and Lombard warlords both before and after the fall of the Western Roman Empire .
Lucian of Antioch had contended for a Christology very similar to what would later be known as Arianism and is thought to have influenced its development .
( Arius was a student of Lucian 's private academy in Antioch . )
After the dispute over Arianism became politicized and a general solution to the divisiveness was sought—with a great majority holding to the Trinitarian position—the Arian position was officially declared heterodox .
Arianism continued to exist for several decades , even within the family of the emperor , the imperial nobility , and higher-ranking clergy .
But , by the end of the 4th century it had surrendered its remaining ground to Trinitarianism in the Roman Empire .
In western Europe , Arianism , which had been taught by Ulfilas , the Arian missionary to the Germanic tribes , was dominant among the Goths and Lombards ( and , significantly for the late Empire , the Vandals ) ; but it ceased to be the mainstream belief by the 8th century , as the rulers of these Germanic tribes gradually adopted Catholicism , beginning with Clovis I of the Franks in 496 .
It was crushed through a series of military and political conquests , culminating in religious "and " political domination of Europe over the next 1,000 years by Trinitarian forces in the Catholic Church .
Trinitarianism has remained the dominant doctrine in all major branches of the Eastern and Western Church and later within Protestantism .
Virtually all extant written material on Arianism is criticism and refutations written by opponents , the nature of Arian beliefs is difficult to define precisely today .
Arians do not believe in the doctrine of the Trinity .
The letter of Arian Auxentius regarding the Arian missionary Ulfilas , gives the clearest picture of Arian beliefs .
Arian Ulfilas who was ordained a bishop by Arian Eusebius of Nicomedia and returned to his people to work as a missionary believed : God , the Father , ( "unbegotten " God ; Almighty God ) always existing and who is the only true God ( John 17:3 ) .
The Son of God , Jesus Christ , ( "only-begotten God " John 1:18 ; Mighty God Isaiah 9:6) begotten before time began ( Proverbs 8:22-29 ; Revelation 3:14 ; Colossians 1:15 ) and who is Lord/Master ( 1 Cor 8:6) .
The Holy Spirit ( the illuminating and sanctifying power , who is neither God nor Lord/Master .
311 – 383 ) , which concludes a letter praising him written by Auxentius , distinguishes God the Father ( "unbegotten " ) , who is the only true God from Son of God ( "only-begotten " ) , who is Lord/Master ; and the Holy Spirit ( the illuminating and sanctifying power ) , who is neither God nor Lord/Master :
250–336 ) to the Arian Eusebius of Nicomedia ( died 341 ) succinctly states the core beliefs of the Arians :
In 321 , Arius was denounced by a synod at Alexandria for teaching a heterodox view of the relationship of Jesus to God the Father .
Because Arius and his followers had great influence in the schools of Alexandria—counterparts to modern universities or seminaries—their theological views spread , especially in the eastern Mediterranean .
By 325 , the controversy had become significant enough that the Emperor Constantine called an assembly of bishops , the First Council of Nicaea , which condemned Arius ' doctrine and formulated the original Nicene Creed of 325 .
The Nicene Creed 's central term , used to describe the relationship between the Father and the Son , is Homoousios ( ) , or Consubstantiality , meaning " of the same substance " or " of one being" .
( The Athanasian Creed is less often used but is a more overtly anti-Arian statement on the Trinity . )
The focus of the Council of Nicaea was the nature of the Son of God , and his precise relationship to God the Father .
( see Paul of Samosata and the Synods of Antioch ) .
Arius taught that Jesus Christ was divine/holy and was sent to earth for the salvation of mankind but that Jesus Christ was not equal to God the Father ( infinite , primordial origin)in rank "and " that God the Father and the Son of God were not equal to the Holy Spirit ( power of God the Father ) .
Under Arianism , Christ was instead not consubstantial with God the Father since both the Father and the Son under Arius were made of "like " essence or being ( see homoiousia ) but not of the same essence or being ( see homoousia ) .
God the Father is a Deity and is divine "and " the Son of God is not a Deity but divine ( I , the LORD , am Deity alone .
God the Father sent Jesus to earth for salvation of mankind ( John 17:3 ) .
Ousia is essence or being , in Eastern Christianity , and is the aspect of God that is completely incomprehensible to mankind and human perception .
It is all that subsists by itself and which has not its being in another , God the Father and God the Son and God the Holy Spirit all being uncreated .
According to the teaching of Arius , the preexistent Logos and thus the incarnate Jesus Christ was a created being ; that only the Son was directly created and begotten by God the Father , before ages , but was of a distinct , though similar , essence or substance from the Creator ; his opponents argued that this would make Jesus less than God , and that this was heretical .
Much of the distinction between the differing factions was over the phrasing that Christ expressed in the New Testament to express submission to God the Father .
The theological term for this submission is kenosis .
This Ecumenical council declared that Jesus Christ was a distinct being of God in existence or reality ( hypostasis ) , which the Latin fathers translated as persona .
Jesus was God in essence , being and or nature (ousia ) , which the Latin fathers translated as substantia .
Constantine is believed to have exiled those who refused to accept the Nicean creed—Arius himself , the deacon Euzoios , and the Libyan bishops Theonas of Marmarica and Secundus of Ptolemais—and also the bishops who signed the creed but refused to join in condemnation of Arius , Eusebius of Nicomedia and Theognis of Nicaea .
The Emperor also ordered all copies of the " Thalia" , the book in which Arius had expressed his teachings , to be burned .
However , there is no evidence that his son and ultimate successor , Constantius II , who was an Arian Christian , was exiled .
Although he was committed to maintaining what the church had defined at Nicaea , Constantine was also bent on pacifying the situation and eventually became more lenient toward those condemned and exiled at the council .
First he allowed Eusebius of Nicomedia , who was a protégé of his sister , and Theognis to return once they had signed an ambiguous statement of faith .
The two , and other friends of Arius , worked for Arius ' rehabilitation .
At the First Synod of Tyre in AD 335 , they brought accusations against Athanasius , bishop of Alexandria , the primary opponent of Arius ; after this , Constantine had Athanasius banished , since he considered him an impediment to reconciliation .
In the same year , the Synod of Jerusalem under Constantine 's direction readmitted Arius to communion in AD 336 .
Arius , however , died on the way to this event in Constantinople .
Some scholars suggest that Arius may have been poisoned by his opponents .
Eusebius and Theognis remained in the Emperor 's favour , and when Constantine , who had been a catechumen much of his adult life , accepted baptism on his deathbed , it was from Eusebius of Nicomedia .
The Council of Nicaea did not end the controversy , as many bishops of the Eastern provinces disputed the "homoousios" , the central term of the Nicene creed , as it had been used by Paul of Samosata , who had advocated a monarchianist Christology .
Both the man and his teaching , including the term "homoousios" , had been condemned by the Synods of Antioch in 269 .
Hence , after Constantine 's death in 337 , open dispute resumed again .
Constantine 's son Constantius II , who had become Emperor of the eastern part of the Empire , actually encouraged the Arians and set out to reverse the Nicene creed .
His advisor in these affairs was Eusebius of Nicomedia , who had already at the Council of Nicea been the head of the Arian party , who also was made bishop of Constantinople .
Constantius used his power to exile bishops adhering to the Nicene creed , especially St Athanasius of Alexandria , who fled to Rome .
In 355 Constantius became the sole Emperor and extended his pro-Arian policy toward the western provinces , frequently using force to push through his creed , even exiling Pope Liberius and installing Antipope Felix II .
As debates raged in an attempt to come up with a new formula , three camps evolved among the opponents of the Nicene creed .
The first group mainly opposed the Nicene terminology and preferred the term "homoiousios " ( alike in substance ) to the Nicene "homoousios" , while they rejected Arius and his teaching and accepted the equality and coeternality of the persons of the Trinity .
Because of this centrist position , and despite their rejection of Arius , they were called " semi-Arians " by their opponents .
The second group also avoided invoking the name of Arius , but in large part followed Arius ' teachings and , in another attempted compromise wording , described the Son as being like ( "homoios " ) the Father .
A third group explicitly called upon Arius and described the Son as unlike ( "anhomoios " ) the Father .
Constantius wavered in his support between the first and the second party , while harshly persecuting the third .
The debates among these groups resulted in numerous synods , among them the Council of Sardica in 343 , the Council of Sirmium in 358 and the double Council of Rimini and Seleucia in 359 , and no fewer than fourteen further creed formulas between 340 and 360 , leading the pagan observer Ammianus Marcellinus to comment sarcastically : " The highways were covered with galloping bishops . "
None of these attempts were acceptable to the defenders of Nicene orthodoxy : writing about the latter councils , Saint Jerome remarked that the world "awoke with a groan to find itself Arian . "
After Constantius ' death in 361 , his successor Julian , a devotee of Rome 's pagan gods , declared that he would no longer attempt to favor one church faction over another , and allowed all exiled bishops to return ; this resulted in further increasing dissension among Christians .
The Emperor Valens , however , revived Constantius ' policy and supported the " Homoian " party , exiling bishops and often using force .
During this persecution many bishops were exiled to the other ends of the Empire , ( e .g. , St Hilary of Poitiers to the Eastern provinces ) .
These contacts and the common plight subsequently led to a rapprochement between the Western supporters of the Nicene creed and the "homoousios " and the Eastern semi-Arians .
It was not until the co-reigns of Gratian and Theodosius that Arianism was effectively wiped out among the ruling class and elite of the Eastern Empire .
Theodosius ' wife St Flacilla was instrumental in his campaign to end Arianism .
Valens died in the Battle of Adrianople in 378 and was succeeded by Theodosius I , who adhered to the Nicene creed .
Two days after Theodosius arrived in Constantinople , 24 November 380 , he expelled the Homoiousian bishop , Demophilus of Constantinople , and surrendered the churches of that city to Gregory Nazianzus , the leader of the rather small Nicene community there , an act which provoked rioting .
Theodosius had just been baptized , by bishop Acholius of Thessalonica , during a severe illness , as was common in the early Christian world .
In February he and Gratian had published an edict that all their subjects should profess the faith of the bishops of Rome and Alexandria ( i .e . , the Nicene faith ) , or be handed over for punishment for not doing so .
Although much of the church hierarchy in the East had opposed the Nicene creed in the decades leading up to Theodosius ' accession , he managed to achieve unity on the basis of the Nicene creed .
In 381 , at the Second Ecumenical Council in Constantinople , a group of mainly Eastern bishops assembled and accepted the Nicene Creed of 381 , which was supplemented in regard to the Holy Spirit , as well as some other changes : see Comparison between Creed of 325 and Creed of 381 .
This is generally considered the end of the dispute about the Trinity and the end of Arianism among the Roman , non-Germanic peoples .
Epiphanius of Salamis labelled the party of Basil of Ancyra in 358 " Semi-Arianism" .
This is considered unfair by Kelly who states that some members of the group were virtually orthodox from the start but disliked the adjective "homoousios " while others had moved in that direction after the out-and-out Arians had come into the open .
However , during the time of Arianism 's flowering in Constantinople , the Gothic convert Ulfilas ( later the subject of the letter of Auxentius cited above ) was sent as a missionary to the Gothic barbarians across the Danube , a mission favored for political reasons by emperor Constantius II .
Ulfilas ' initial success in converting this Germanic people to an Arian form of Christianity was strengthened by later events .
When the Germanic peoples entered the Roman Empire and founded successor-kingdoms in the western part , most had been Arian Christians for more than a century .
The conflict in the 4th century had seen Arian and Nicene factions struggling for control of the Church .
In contrast , in the Arian German kingdoms established on the wreckage of the Western Roman Empire in the 5th century , there were entirely separate Arian and Nicene Churches with parallel hierarchies , each serving different sets of believers .
The Germanic elites were Arians , and the majority population was Nicene .
Many scholars see the persistence of Germanic Arianism as a strategy that was followed in order to differentiate the Germanic elite from the local inhabitants and their culture and also to maintain the Germanic elite 's separate group identity .
Most Germanic tribes were generally tolerant of the Nicene beliefs of their subjects .
However , the Vandals tried for several decades to force their Arian beliefs on their North African Nicene subjects , exiling Nicene clergy , dissolving monasteries , and exercising heavy pressure on non-conforming Christians .
By the beginning of the 8th century , these kingdoms had either been conquered by Nicene neighbors ( Ostrogoths , Vandals , Burgundians ) or their rulers had accepted Nicene Christianity ( Visigoths , Lombards ) .
The Franks and the Anglo-Saxons were unique among the Germanic peoples in that they entered the empire as pagans and converted to Nicene ( Catholic ) Christianity directly , guided by their kings , Clovis and Æthelberht of Kent .
Remnants in the West , 5th to 7th centuries .
However , much of southeastern Europe and central Europe , including many of the Goths and Vandals respectively , had embraced Arianism ( the Visigoths converted to Arian Christianity in 376 ) , which led to Arianism being a religious factor in various wars in the Roman Empire .
In the west , organized Arianism survived in North Africa , in Hispania , and parts of Italy until it was finally suppressed in the 6th and 7th centuries .
Grimwald , King of the Lombards ( 662–671 ) , and his young son and successor Garibald ( 671 ) , were the last Arian kings in Europe .
The term " Arian " bestowed by Athanasius upon his opponents in the Christological debate was polemical .
Even in Athanasius ' Orations against the Arians , Arius hardly emerges consistently as the creative individual originator of the heresy that bears his name , even though it would have greatly strengthened Athanasius ' case to present him in that light .
Arius was not really very important to general Arianism after his exile at Nicaea .
The efforts to get Arius brought out of exile on the parts of Eusebius of Nicomedia were chiefly political concerns and there is little evidence that any of Arius ' writings were used as doctrinal norms even in the East .
Labels such as 'semi-Arian' or 'neo-Arian' are misleading , for those labelled so would have disavowed the importance of their relation to Arius .
In many ways , the conflict around Arian beliefs in the 4th , 5th and 6th centuries helped firmly define the centrality of the Trinity in Nicene Christian theology .
As the first major intra-Christian conflict after Christianity 's legalization , the struggle between Nicenes and Arians left a deep impression on the institutional memory of Nicene churches .
Thus , over the past 1,500 years , some Christians have used the term " Arian " to refer to those groups that see themselves as worshiping Jesus Christ or respecting his teachings , but do not hold to the Nicene creed .
Despite the frequency with which this name is used as a polemical label , there has been no historically continuous survival of Arianism into the modern era .
Following the Protestant Reformation from 1517 , it did not take long for Arian and other non-trinitarian views to resurface .
The first recorded English antitrinitarian was John Assheton who was forced to recant before Thomas Cranmer in 1548 .
At the Anabaptist Council of Venice 1550 , the early Italian instigators of the Radical Reformation committed to the views of Miguel Servet ( d.1553 ) , and these were promulgated by Giorgio Biandrata and others into Poland and Transylvania .
The antitrinitarian wing of the Polish Reformation separated from the Calvinist "ecclesia maior " to form the "ecclesia minor " or Polish Brethren .
These were commonly referred to as " Arians " due to their rejection of the Trinity , though in fact the Socinians , as they were later known , went further than Arius to the position of Photinus .
The epithet " Arian " was also applied to the early Unitarians such as John Biddle though in denial of the pre-existence of Christ they were again largely Socinians not Arians .
In the 18th century the "dominant trend " in Britain , particularly in Latitudinarianism , was towards Arianism , with which the names of Samuel Clarke , Benjamin Hoadly , William Whiston and Isaac Newton are associated .
To quote the " Encyclopædia Britannica " article on Arianism : " In modern times some Unitarians are virtually Arians in that they are unwilling either to reduce Christ to a mere human being or to attribute to him a divine nature identical with that of the Father . "
However , their doctrines cannot be considered representative of traditional Arian doctrines or vice-versa .
A similar view was held by the ancient anti-Nicene Pneumatomachi ( Greek : , “breath ” or “spirit ” and “fighters” , combining as “fighters against the spirit” ) , so called because they opposed the deifying of the Nicene Holy Ghost .
However , the Pneumatomachi were adherents of Macedonianism , and though their beliefs were somewhat reminiscent of Arianism , they were distinct enough to be distinguishably different .
The Iglesia ni Cristo is one of the largest groups that teaches a similar doctrine , though they are really closer to Socinianism , believing the Word in John 1:1 is God 's plan of salvation , not Christ .
Another group that may be considered Arian is the Church of God (7th day ) - Salem Conference .
Another group that may be considered Arian is the Christian Churches of God .
Other groups opposing the Trinity are not necessarily Arian .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
This article will go through a wide range of topics of the geography of the state of Alabama .
It is 30th in size and borders four U.S. states : Mississippi , Tennessee , Georgia , and Florida .
Extending entirely across the state of Alabama for about northern boundary , and in the middle stretching farther south , is the Cumberland Plateau , or Tennessee Valley region , broken into broad tablelands by the dissection of rivers .
In the northern part of this plateau , west of Jackson county , there are about of level highlands from above sea level .
South of these highlands , occupying a narrow strip on each side of the Tennessee River , is a country of gentle rolling lowlands varying in elevation from .
To the northeast of these highlands and lowlands is a rugged section with steep mountain-sides , deep narrow coves and valleys , and flat mountain-tops .
In the remainder of this region , the southern portion , the most prominent feature is " Little Mountain" , extending about from east to west between two valleys , and rising precipitously on the north side above them or above the sea .
Adjoining the Cumberland Plateau region on the southeast is the Appalachian Valley ( locally known as Coosa Valley ) region , which is the southern extremity of the Appalachian Mountains , and occupies an area within the state of about .
This is a limestone belt with parallel hard rock ridges left standing by erosion to form mountains .
Although the general direction of the mountains , ridges , and valleys is northeast and southwest , irregularity is one of the most prominent characteristics .
In the northeast are several flat-topped mountains , of which Raccoon and Lookout are the most prominent , having a maximum elevation near the Georgia line of little more than and gradually decreasing in height toward the southwest , where Sand Mountain is a continuation of Raccoon .
South of these the mountains are marked by steep northwest sides , sharp crests and gently sloping southeast sides .
Southeast of the Appalachian Valley region , the Piedmont Plateau also crosses the Alabama border from the N.E.
and occupies a small triangular-shaped section of which Randolph and Clay counties , together with the northern part of Tallapoosa and Chambers , form the principal portion .
Its surface is gently undulating and has an elevation of about above sea level .
The Piedmont Plateau is a lowland worn down by erosion on hard crystalline rocks , then uplifted to form a plateau .
The remainder of the state is occupied by the " Coastal Plain" .
This is crossed by foot-hills and rolling prairies in the central part of the state , where it has a mean elevation of about , becomes lower and more level toward the southwest , and in the extreme south is flat and but slightly elevated above the sea .
The Cumberland Plateau region is drained to the west-northwest by the Tennessee River and its tributaries ; all other parts of the state are drained to the southwest .
In the Appalachian Valley region the Coosa River is the principal river ; and in the Piedmont Plateau , the Tallapoosa River .
In the Coastal Plain are the Tombigbee River in the west , the Alabama River ( formed by the Coosa and Tallapoosa ) in the western central , and in the east the Chattahoochee River , which forms almost half of the Georgia boundary .
The Tombigbee and Alabama rivers unite near the southwest corner of the state , their waters discharging into Mobile Bay by the Mobile and Tensas rivers .
The Black Warrior River is a considerable stream which joins the Tombigbee from the east .
The valleys in the north and northeast are usually deep and narrow , but in the Coastal Plain they are broad and in most cases rise in three successive terraces above the stream .
The harbour of Mobile was formed by the drowning of the lower part of the valley of the Alabama and Tombigbee rivers as a result of the sinking of the land here , such sinking having occurred on other parts of the Gulf coast .
The fauna and flora of Alabama are similar to those of the Gulf states in general and have no distinctive characteristics .
However , the Mobile River system has a high incidence of endemism among freshwater mollusks and biodiversity is high .
In Alabama , vast forests of pine constitute the largest proportion of the state 's forest growth .
There is also an abundance of cypress , hickory , oak , populus , and eastern redcedar trees .
In other areas , hemlock growths in the north and southern white cedar in the southwest .
Other native trees include ash , hackberry , and holly .
In the Gulf region of the state grow various species of palmetto and palm .
In Alabama there are more than 150 shrubs , including mountain laurel and rhododendron .
While in the past the state enjoyed a variety of mammals such as plains bison , eastern elk , North American cougar , bear , and deer , only the white-tailed deer remains abundant .
Still fairly common are the bobcat , American beaver , muskrat , raccoon , Virginia opossum , rabbit , squirrel , red and gray foxes , and long-tailed weasel .
Coypu and nine-banded armadillo have been introduced to the state and now also common .
Alabama’s birds include golden and bald eagles , osprey and other hawks , yellow-shafted flickers , and black-and-white warblers .
Game birds include bobwhite quail , duck , wild turkey , and goose .
Freshwater fish such as bream , shad , bass , and sucker are common .
Along the Gulf Coast there are seasonal runs of tarpon , pompano , red drum , and bonito .
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service lists as endangered 99 animals , fish , and birds , and 18 plant species .
The endangered animals include the Alabama beach mouse , gray bat , Alabama red-bellied turtle , fin and humpback whales , bald eagle , and wood stork .
American black bear , racking horse , yellow-shafted flicker , wild turkey , Atlantic tarpon , largemouth bass , southern longleaf pine , eastern tiger swallowtail , monarch butterfly , Alabama red-bellied turtle , Red Hills salamander , camellia , oak-leaf hydrangea , peach , pecan , and blackberry are Alabama 's state symbols .
The heat of summer is tempered in the south by the winds from the Gulf of Mexico , and in the north by the elevation above the sea .
The average annual temperature is highest in the southwest along the coast , and lowest in the northeast among the highlands .
Thus at Mobile the annual mean is 67 °F ( 19 °C ) , the mean for the summer 81 °F ( 27 °C ) , and for the winter 52 °F ( 11 °C ) ; and at Valley Head , in De Kalb county , the annual mean is 59 °F ( 15 °C ) , the mean for the summer 75 °F ( 24 °C ) , and for the winter 41 °F ( 5 °C ) .
At Montgomery , in the central region , the average annual temperature is 66 °F ( 19 °C ) , with a winter average of 49 °F ( 9 °C ) , and a summer average of 81 °F ( 27 °C ) .
The average winter minimum for the entire state is 35 °F ( 2 °C ) , and there is an average of 35 days in each year in which the thermometer falls below the freezing-point .
At extremely rare intervals the thermometer has fallen below zero (-18 °C ) , as was the case in the remarkable cold wave of the 12th-13 February 1899 , when an absolute minimum of -17 °F (-29 °C ) was registered at Valley Head .
The highest temperature ever recorded was 109 °F ( 43 °C ) in Talladega county in 1902 .
The amount of precipitation is greatest along the coast ( 62 inches/1,574 mm ) and evenly distributed through the rest of the state ( about 52 inches/1,320 mm ) .
During each winter there is usually one fall of snow in the south and two in the north ; but the snow quickly disappears , and sometimes , during an entire winter , the ground is not covered with snow .
Heavy snowfall can occur , such as during the New Year 's Eve 1963 snowstorm and the 1993 Storm of the Century .
Hailstorms occur occasionally in the spring and summer , but are seldom destructive .
Heavy fogs are rare , and are confined chiefly to the coast .
Thunderstorms occur throughout the year - they are most common in the summer , but most severe in the spring and fall , when destructive winds and tornadoes occasionally occur .
Hurricanes are quite common in the state , especially in the southern part , and major hurricanes occasionally strike the coast which can be very destructive .
As regards its soil , Alabama may be divided into four regions .
Extending from the Gulf northward for about 150 miles ( 240 km ) is the outer belt of the Coastal Plain , also called the " Timber Belt , " whose soil is sandy and poor , but responds well to fertilization .
North of this is the inner lowland of the Coastal Plain , or the " Black Prairie , " which includes some and seventeen counties .
It receives its name from its soil ( weathered from the weak underlying limestone ) , which is black in colour , almost destitute of sand and loam , and rich in limestone and marl formations , especially adapted to the production of cotton ; hence the region is also called the " Cotton Belt . " Between the " Cotton Belt " and the Tennessee Valley is the mineral region , the " Old Land " area—a region of resistant rocks—whose soils , also derived from weathering in silu , are of varied fertility , the best coming from the granites , sandstones and limestones , the poorest from the gneisses , schists and slates .
North of the mineral region is the " Cereal Belt , " embracing the Tennessee Valley and the counties beyond , whose richest soils are the red clays and dark loams of the river valley ; north of which are less fertile soils , produced by siliceous and sandstone formations .
Wetumpka is the home of " Alabama 's greatest natural disaster . "
A -wide meteorite hit the area about 80 million years ago .
The hills just east of downtown showcase the eroded remains of the five mile ( 8 km ) wide impact crater that was blasted into the bedrock , with the area labeled the Wetumpka crater or astrobleme ( "star-wound " ) for the concentric rings of fractures and zones of shattered rock can be found beneath the surface .
In 2002 , Christian Koeberl with the Institute of Geochemistry University of Vienna published evidence and established the site as an internationally recognized impact crater .
Alabama includes several types of public use lands .
These include four national forests and one national preserve within state borders that provide over 25 % of the state 's public recreation land .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
The Alan Parsons Project was a British progressive rock band , active between 1975 and 1990 , consisting of Eric Woolfson and Alan Parsons surrounded by a varying number of session musicians and some relatively consistent band members such as guitarist Ian Bairnson .
Behind the revolving line-up and the regular sidemen , the true core of the Project was the duo of Parsons and Woolfson .
Woolfson was a songwriter by profession , but also a composer and pianist .
Parsons was a successful producer and accomplished engineer .
Almost all songs on the band 's albums are credited to " Woolfson/Parsons " .
Alan Parsons met Eric Woolfson in the canteen of Abbey Road Studios in the summer of 1974 .
Parsons had already acted as assistant engineer on the Beatles ' " Abbey Road " and " Let It Be" , had recently engineered Pink Floyd 's " The Dark Side of the Moon " , and had produced several acts for EMI Records .
Woolfson , a songwriter and composer , was working as a session pianist ; he had also composed material for a concept album idea based on the work of Edgar Allan Poe .
When Parsons asked Woolfson to become his manager , he accepted and subsequently managed Parsons ' career as a producer and engineer through a string of successes , including Pilot , Steve Harley , Cockney Rebel , John Miles , Al Stewart , Ambrosia and The Hollies .
Parsons commented at the time that he felt frustrated in having to accommodate the views of some of the musicians , which he felt interfered with his production .
Woolfson came up with the idea of making an album based on developments in the film industry , where directors such as Alfred Hitchcock and Stanley Kubrick were the focal point of the film 's promotion , rather than individual film stars .
If the film industry was becoming a director 's medium , Woolfson felt the music business might well become a producer 's medium .
Recalling his earlier Edgar Allan Poe material , Woolfson saw a way to combine his and Parsons ' respective talents .
Parsons would produce and engineer songs written by the two , and the Alan Parsons Project was born .
Their first album , " Tales of Mystery and Imagination" , including major contributions by all members of Pilot and Ambrosia , was a success , reaching the Top 40 in the US Billboard 200 chart .
The song " The Raven " featured lead vocals by the actor Leonard Whiting , and , according to the 2007 remastered album liner notes , was the first rock song to use a digital vocoder , with Alan Parsons speaking lyrics through it .
Arista Records then signed The Alan Parsons Project for further albums .
Through the late 1970s and early 1980s , the group 's popularity continued to grow ( although they were always more popular in North America and Continental Europe than in their home country , never achieving a UK Top 40 single or Top 20 album ) .
The singles " I Would n't Want to Be Like You" , " Games People Play" , " Damned If I Do" , " Time " ( Woolfson 's first lead vocal ) , "Eye in the Sky " and " Do n't Answer Me " had a notable impact on the Billboard Hot 100 .
After those successes , however , the group began to fade from view .
There were fewer hit singles , and declining album sales .
1987 's " Gaudi" was the Project 's last release , though they planned to record an album called " Freudiana " next .
Although the studio version of " Freudiana " was produced by Parsons ( and featured the regular Project backing musicians , making it an 'unofficial ' Project album ) , it was primarily Woolfson 's idea to turn it into a musical .
This eventually led to a rift between the two artists .
While Parsons pursued his own solo career and took many members of the Project on the road for the first time in a successful worldwide tour , Woolfson went on to produce musical plays influenced by the Project 's music .
" Freudiana" , " Gaudi" and " Gambler " were three musicals that included some Project songs like "Eye in the Sky" , " Time" , " Inside Looking Out" , and " Limelight " .
The live music from " Gambler " was only distributed at the performance site in Mönchengladbach , Germany .
In 1981 , Parsons , Woolfson and their record label Arista , were stalled in contract renegotiations when on March 5th , the two submitted an all-instrumental atonal album tentatively titled ' The Sicilian Defence ' ( the name of an aggressive opening move in chess ) , arguably to get out of their recording contract .
Arista 's refusal to release the album had two known effects : the negotiations led to a renewed contract and the album was not released at that time .
In interviews made before his 2009 death , Woolfson said he planned to release one track from the " Sicilian " album , which in 2008 appeared as a bonus track on a CD re-issue of the " Eve " album .
Sometime later , Alan had changed his mind about the album , and announced that it would finally be released on an upcoming Project box set called ' The Complete Albums Collection ' in 2014 for the first time as a bonus disc .
Parsons released titles under his name ( " Try Anything Once" , " On Air" , " The Time Machine" , and " A Valid Path" ) , while Woolfson made concept albums named " Freudiana " ( about Sigmund Freud 's work on psychology ) and " " ( continuing from the Alan Parsons Project 's first album about Edgar Allan Poe 's literature ) .
" Tales of Mystery and Imagination " was first remixed in 1987 for release on CD , and included narration by Orson Welles which had been recorded in 1975 , but arrived too late to be included on the original album .
On the 2007 deluxe edition release , it is revealed that parts of this tape were used for the 1976 Griffith Park Planetarium launch of the original album , the 1987 remix , and various radio spots , all of which were included as bonus material .
Most of the Project 's titles , especially the early work , share common traits ( likely influenced by Pink Floyd 's " The Dark Side of the Moon " , on which Parsons was the audio engineer in 1973 ) .
They were concept albums , and typically began with an instrumental introduction which faded into the first song , often had an instrumental piece in the middle of the second LP side , and concluded with a quiet , melancholic , or powerful song .
The opening instrumental was largely done away with by 1980 ; no later Project album except "Eye in the Sky " featured one ( although every album includes at least one instrumental somewhere in the running order ) .
The instrumental on that album , " Sirius" , eventually became the best-known ( or at least most frequently heard ) Parsons instrumental .
It was used as entrance music by various American sports teams , most notably by the Chicago Bulls during their 1990s NBA dynasty .
It was also used as the entrance theme for Ricky Steamboat in pro wrestling of the mid-1980s .
In addition , Sirius has been played in a variety of TV shows and movies including the episode " Vanishing Act " of " " , and the 2009 film " Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs " .
The group was notable for using several vocal performers instead of having a single lead vocalist .
Lead vocal duties were shared by guest vocalists chosen by their vocal style to complement each song .
In later years , Woolfson sang lead on many of the group 's hits ( including " Time" , "Eye in the Sky " and " Do n't Answer Me" ) ; however , he did not sing any lead vocals on the band 's first four albums , and appeared as vocalist only sporadically thereafter .
When the Woolfson-sung songs became significant hits , the record company pressured Parsons to use him more , but Parsons preferred "real " singers , which Woolfson admitted he was not .
In addition to Woolfson , Chris Rainbow , Lenny Zakatek , John Miles , David Paton and The Zombies ' Colin Blunstone made regular appearances .
Other singers , such as Arthur Brown , Procol Harum 's Gary Brooker , Dave Terry aka Elmer Gantry , Vitamin Z 's Geoff Barradale and Marmalade 's Dean Ford , have recorded only once or twice with the Project .
Parsons himself only sang lead on one song ( " The Raven " ) through a vocoder , and can be heard singing backing vocals on a few others , including " To One in Paradise " .
Both of those songs appeared on " Tales of Mystery and Imagination " .
Although the vocalists varied , a small number of musicians worked with the Alan Parsons Project regularly .
These core musicians contributed to the recognisable style of a Project song in spite of the varied singer line-up .
Together with Parsons and Woolfson , the Project originally consisted of the group Pilot , with Ian Bairnson ( guitar ) , David Paton ( bass ) and Stuart Tosh ( drums ) .
From " Pyramid " onwards , Tosh was replaced by Stuart Elliott of Cockney Rebel .
Bairnson played on all albums and Paton stayed almost until the end .
Andrew Powell appeared as arranger of orchestra ( and often choirs ) on all albums except " Vulture Culture" , when he was composing the score of Richard Donner 's film " Ladyhawke" .
This score was partly in the Project style , recorded by most of the Project regulars , and produced and engineered by Parsons .
Powell also composed some material for the first two Project albums .
From " Vulture Culture " onwards , Richard Cottle played as a regular member on synthesizers and saxophone .
Except for one occasion , the Project never played live during its original incarnation .
This was because Woolfson and Parsons saw themselves mainly in the roles of writing and production , and also because of the technical difficulties of reproducing on stage the complex instrumentation used in the studio .
In the 1990s things changed with the technology of digital samplers .
The one occasion where the band was introduced as " The Alan Parsons Project " in a live performance was at Night of the Proms 1990 ( at the time of the group 's break-up ) , featuring all Project regulars except Woolfson who was present but behind the scenes , while Parsons stayed at the mixer except during the last song , where he played acoustic guitar .
Since 1993 , a new version of the band has toured , with Parsons performing live acoustic guitar , keyboards and vocals , with various line-ups .
This latest incarnation was called Alan Parsons , eventually renaming as the Alan Parsons Live Project , the name distinct from " The Alan Parsons Project " , due to founder Parsons ' break-up with Woolfson .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
An aromatic hydrocarbon or arene ( or sometimes aryl hydrocarbon ) is a hydrocarbon with alternating double and single bonds between carbon atoms forming rings .
The term 'aromatic ' was assigned before the physical mechanism determining aromaticity was discovered , and was derived from the fact that many of the compounds have a sweet scent .
The configuration of six carbon atoms in aromatic compounds is known as a benzene ring , after the simplest possible such hydrocarbon , benzene .
Some non-benzene-based compounds called heteroarenes , which follows Hückel 's rule ( for monocyclic rings : when the number of its π-electrons equals 4n+2 ) , are also called as aromatic compounds .
In these compounds , at least one carbon atom is replaced by one of the heteroatoms oxygen , nitrogen , or sulfur .
Examples of non-benzene compounds with aromatic properties are furan , a heterocyclic compound with a five-membered ring that includes an oxygen atom , and pyridine , a heterocyclic compound with a six-membered ring containing one nitrogen atom .
Benzene , C6H6 , is the simplest aromatic hydrocarbon , and it was the first one recognized .
The nature of its bonding was first recognized by August Kekulé in the 19th century .
Each carbon atom in the hexagonal cycle has four electrons to share .
One goes to the hydrogen atom , and one each to the two neighboring carbons .
This leaves one to share with one of its two neighboring carbon atoms , which is why the benzene molecule is drawn with alternating single and double bonds around the hexagon .
The structure is also illustrated as a circle around the inside of the ring to show six electrons floating around in delocalized molecular orbitals the size of the ring itself .
This also represents the equivalent nature of the six carbon-carbon bonds all of bond order ~1.5 .
This equivalency is well explained by resonance forms .
The electrons are visualized as floating above and below the ring with the electromagnetic fields they generate acting to keep the ring flat .
The circle symbol for aromaticity was introduced by Sir Robert Robinson and his student James Armit in 1925 and popularized starting in 1959 by the Morrison & Boyd textbook on organic chemistry .
The proper use of the symbol is debated ; it is used to describe any cyclic pi system in some publications , or only those pi systems that obey Hückel 's rule on others .
Jensen argues that in line with Robinson 's original proposal , the use of the circle symbol should be limited to monocyclic 6 pi-electron systems .
In this way the circle symbol for a 6c–6e bond can be compared to the Y symbol for a 3c–2e bond .
A reaction that forms an arene compound from an unsaturated or partially unsaturated cyclic precursor is simply called an aromatization .
Many laboratory methods exist for the organic synthesis of arenes from non-arene precursors .
Alkyne trimerization describes the [ 2+2+2 ] cyclization of three alkynes , in the Dötz reaction an alkyne , carbon monoxide and a chromium carbene complex are the reactants .Diels-Alder reactions of alkynes with pyrone or cyclopentadienone with expulsion of carbon dioxide or carbon monoxide also form arene compounds .
In Bergman cyclization the reactants are an enyne plus a hydrogen donor .
Another set of methods is the aromatization of cyclohexanes and other aliphatic rings : reagents are catalysts used in hydrogenation such as platinum , palladium and nickel ( reverse hydrogenation ) , quinones and the elements sulfur and selenium .
In aromatic substitution one substituent on the arene ring , usually hydrogen , is replaced by another substituent .
The two main types are electrophilic aromatic substitution when the active reagent is an electrophile and nucleophilic aromatic substitution when the reagent is a nucleophile .
In radical-nucleophilic aromatic substitution the active reagent is a radical .
An example of electrophilic aromatic substitution is the nitration of salicylic acid :
In coupling reactions a metal catalyses a coupling between two formal radical fragments .
Common coupling reactions with arenes result in the formation of new carbon–carbon bonds e.g. , alkylarenes , vinyl arenes , biraryls , new carbon–nitrogen bonds ( anilines ) or new carbon–oxygen bonds (aryloxy compounds ) .
An example is the direct arylation of perfluorobenzenes
The compound 1-naphthol is completely reduced to a mixture of decalin-ol isomers .
The compound resorcinol , hydrogenated with Raney nickel in presence of aqueous sodium hydroxide forms an enolate which is alkylated with methyl iodide to "2-methyl-1,3-cyclohexandione " :
Unusual thermal Diels-Alder reactivity of arenes can be found in the Wagner-Jauregg reaction .
Other photochemical cycloaddition reactions with alkenes occur through excimers .
Benzene derivatives have from one to six substituents attached to the central benzene core .
Examples of benzene compounds with just one substituent are phenol , which carries a hydroxyl group , and toluene with a methyl group .
When there is more than one substituent present on the ring , their spatial relationship becomes important for which the arene substitution patterns "ortho" , "meta" , and "para " are devised .
For example , three isomers exist for cresol because the methyl group and the hydroxyl group can be placed next to each other (ortho ) , one position removed from each other ( meta ) , or two positions removed from each other ( para ) .
Xylenol has two methyl groups in addition to the hydroxyl group , and , for this structure , 6 isomers exist .
The arene ring has an ability to stabilize charges .
This is seen in , for example , phenol ( C6H5-OH) , which is acidic at the hydroxyl ( OH) , since a charge on this oxygen ( alkoxide -O– ) is partially delocalized into the benzene ring .
Poly-aromatic hydrocarbons ( PAHs ) , also known as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons or polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons , are potent atmospheric pollutants that consist of fused aromatic rings and do not contain heteroatoms or carry substituents .
Naphthalene is the simplest example of a PAH.
PAHs occur in oil , coal , and tar deposits , and are produced as byproducts of fuel burning ( whether fossil fuel or biomass ) .
As a pollutant , they are of concern because some compounds have been identified as carcinogenic , mutagenic , and teratogenic .
Studies have shown that high levels of PAHs are found , for example , in meat cooked at high temperatures such as grilling or barbecuing , and in smoked fish .
They are also found in the interstellar medium , in comets , and in meteorites and are a candidate molecule to act as a basis for the earliest forms of life .
In graphene the PAH motif is extended to large 2D sheets .
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons are lipophilic , meaning they mix more easily with oil than water .
The larger compounds are less water-soluble and less volatile ( i .e . , less prone to evaporate ) .
Because of these properties , PAHs in the environment are found primarily in soil , sediment and oily substances , as opposed to in water or air .
However , they are also a component of concern in particulate matter suspended in air .
Natural crude oil and coal deposits contain significant amounts of PAHs , arising from chemical conversion of natural product molecules , such as steroids , to aromatic hydrocarbons .
They are also found in processed fossil fuels , tar and various edible oils .
PAHs are one of the most widespread organic pollutants .
In addition to their presence in fossil fuels they are also formed by incomplete combustion of carbon-containing fuels such as wood , coal , diesel , fat , tobacco , and incense .
Different types of combustion yield different distributions of PAHs in both relative amounts of individual PAHs and in which isomers are produced .
Thus , coal burning produces a different mixture than motor-fuel combustion or a forest fire , making the compounds potentially useful as indicators of the burning history .
Hydrocarbon emissions from fossil fuel-burning engines are regulated in developed countries .
PAHs toxicity is very structurally dependent , with isomers ( PAHs with the same formula and number of rings ) varying from being nontoxic to being extremely toxic .
Thus , highly carcinogenic PAHs may be small or large .
One PAH compound , , is notable for being the first chemical carcinogen to be discovered ( and is one of many carcinogens found in cigarette smoke ) .
The EPA has classified seven PAH compounds as probable human carcinogens : , , , , chrysene , dibenz(a ,h)anthracene , and indeno( 1,2,3-cd)pyrene .
PAHs known for their carcinogenic , mutagenic and teratogenic properties are and chrysene , , , , , , coronene , dibenz(a ,h)anthracene ( C20H14 ) , indeno( 1,2,3-cd)pyrene ( C22H12 ) and ovalene .
High prenatal exposure to PAH is associated with lower IQ and childhood asthma .
The Center for Children 's Environmental Health reports studies that demonstrate that exposure to PAH pollution during pregnancy is related to adverse birth outcomes including low birth weight , premature delivery , and heart malformations .
Cord blood of exposed babies shows DNA damage that has been linked to cancer .
Follow-up studies show a higher level of developmental delays at age three , lower scores on IQ tests and increased behavioral problems at ages six and eight .
Although the health effects of individual PAHs are not exactly alike , the following 17 PAHs are considered as a group in this profile issued by the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry ( ATSDR) :
The simplest PAHs , as defined by the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry ( IUPAC ) ( G.P Moss , IUPAC nomenclature for fused-ring systems ) , are phenanthrene and anthracene , which both contain three fused aromatic rings .
Smaller molecules , such as benzene , are not PAHs .
PAHs may contain four-, five-, six - or seven-member rings , but those with five or six are most common .
PAHs composed only of six-membered rings are called alternant PAHs .
The name comes from benzene , an aromatic hydrocarbon with a single , six-membered ring .
These can be benzene rings interconnected with each other by single carbon-carbon bonds and with no rings remaining that do not contain a complete benzene ring .
The set of alternant PAHs is closely related to a set of mathematical entities called polyhexes , which are planar figures composed by conjoining regular hexagons of identical size .
PAHs containing up to six fused aromatic rings are often known as " small " PAHs , and those containing more than six aromatic rings are called "large " PAHs .
Due to the availability of samples of the various small PAHs , the bulk of research on PAHs has been of those of up to six rings .
The biological activity and occurrence of the large PAHs does appear to be a continuation of the small PAHs .
They are found as combustion products , but at lower levels than the small PAHs due to the kinetic limitation of their production through addition of successive rings .
In addition , with many more isomers possible for larger PAHs , the occurrence of specific structures is much smaller .
These often possess many absorbance bands and are unique for each ring structure .
Thus , for a set of isomers , each isomer has a different UV absorbance spectrum than the others .
This is particularly useful in the identification of PAHs .
Most PAHs are also fluorescent , emitting characteristic wavelengths of light when they are excited ( when the molecules absorb light ) .
The extended pi-electron electronic structures of PAHs lead to these spectra , as well as to certain large PAHs also exhibiting semi-conducting and other behaviors .
Naphthalene ( C10H8 constituent of mothballs ) , consisting of two coplanar six-membered rings sharing an edge , is another aromatic hydrocarbon .
By formal convention , it is not a true PAH , though is referred to as a bicyclic aromatic hydrocarbon .
Aqueous solubility decreases approximately one order of magnitude for each additional ring .
Detection of PAHs in materials is often done using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry or liquid chromatography with ultraviolet-visible or fluorescence spectroscopic methods or by using rapid test PAH indicator strips .
The United States Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) has designated 32 PAH compounds as priority pollutants .
They are naphthalene , acenaphthylene , acenaphthene , fluorene , phenanthrene , anthracene , fluoranthene , pyrene , , chrysene , , , , dibenz( ah )anthracene , , and indeno( 1,2,3-cd)pyrene .
This list of the 16 EPA priority PAHs is often targeted for measurement in environmental samples .
Although PAHs clearly are aromatic compounds , the degree of aromaticity can be different for each ring segment .
According to Clar 's rule ( formulated by Erich Clar in 1964 ) for PAHs the resonance structure with the most disjoint aromatic п-sextets—i .e . , benzene-like moieties—is the most important for the characterization of the properties .
For example , in phenanthrene ( 1 ) one Clar structure has two sextets at the extremities , while the other resonance structure has just one central sextet .
Therefore in this molecule the outer rings are firmly aromatic while its central ring is less aromatic and therefore more reactive .
In contrast , in anthracene ( 2 ) the number of sextets is just one and aromaticity spreads out .
This difference in number of sextets is reflected in the UV absorbance spectra of these two isomers .
Phenanthrene has a highest wavelength absorbance around 290 nm , while anthracene has highest wavelength bands around 380 nm .
Three Clar structures with two sextets are present in chrysene ( 3 ) and by superposition the aromaticity in the outer ring is larger than in the inner rings .
In January 2004 ( at the 203rd Meeting of the American Astronomical Society ) , it was reported that a team led by A. Witt of the University of Toledo , Ohio studied ultraviolet light emitted by the Red Rectangle nebula and found the spectral signatures of anthracene and pyrene ( no other such complex molecules had ever before been found in space ) .
This discovery was considered as a controversial confirmation of a hypothesis that as nebulae of the same type as the Red Rectangle approach the ends of their lives , convection currents cause carbon and hydrogen in the nebulae 's core to get caught in stellar winds , and radiate outward .
As they cool , the atoms supposedly bond to each other in various ways and eventually form particles of a million or more atoms .
Witt and his team inferred that since they discovered PAHs—which may have been vital in the formation of early life on Earth—in a nebula , by necessity they must originate in nebulae .
More recently , fullerenes ( or "buckyballs " ) , have been detected in other nebulae .
Fullerenes are also implicated in the origin of life ; according to astronomer Letizia Stanghellini , " It’s possible that buckyballs from outer space provided seeds for life on Earth . ”
In September 2012 , NASA scientists reported that PAHs , subjected to interstellar medium ( ISM) conditions , are transformed , through hydrogenation , oxygenation and hydroxylation , to more complex organics - " a step along the path toward amino acids and nucleotides , the raw materials of proteins and DNA , respectively " .
Further , as a result of these transformations , the PAHs lose their spectroscopic signature which could be one of the reasons " for the lack of PAH detection in interstellar ice grains , particularly the outer regions of cold , dense clouds or the upper molecular layers of protoplanetary disks . "
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
In mathematics , the associative property is a property of some binary operations .
In propositional logic , associativity is a valid rule of replacement for expressions in logical proofs .
Within an expression containing two or more occurrences in a row of the same associative operator , the order in which the operations are performed does not matter as long as the sequence of the operands is not changed .
That is , rearranging the parentheses in such an expression will not change its value .
Even though the parentheses were rearranged , the values of the expressions were not altered .
Since this holds true when performing addition and multiplication on any real numbers , we say that "addition and multiplication of real numbers are associative operations . "
Associativity is not to be confused with commutativity , which addresses whether " a × b = b × a" .
Associative operations are abundant in mathematics ; in fact , many algebraic structures ( such as semigroups and categories ) explicitly require their binary operations to be associative .
However , many important and interesting operations are non-associative ; some examples include subtraction , exponentiation and the vector cross product .
In contrast to the theoretical counterpart , the addition of floating point numbers in computer science is not associative , and is an important source of rounding error .
Formally , a binary operation formula_3 on a set " S" is called associative if it satisfies the associative law :
Here , formula_3 is used to replace the symbol of the operation , which may be any symbol , and even the absence of symbol like for the multiplication .
The associative law can also be expressed in functional notation thus : formula_7 .
If a binary operation is associative , repeated application of the operation produces the same result regardless how valid pairs of parenthesis are inserted in the expression .
For instance , a product of four elements may be written in five possible ways :
If the product operation is associative , the generalized associative law says that all these formulas will yield the same result , making the parenthesis unnecessary .
Thus " the " product can be written unambiguously as
As the number of elements increases , the number of possible ways to insert parentheses grows quickly , but they remain unnecessary for disambiguation .
Some examples of associative operations include the following .
In standard truth-functional propositional logic , "association" , or "associativity " are two valid rules of replacement .
The rules allow one to move parentheses in logical expressions in logical proofs .
where "formula_15 " is a metalogical symbol representing " can be replaced in a proof with . "
" Associativity " is a property of some logical connectives of truth-functional propositional logic .
The following logical equivalences demonstrate that associativity is a property of particular connectives .
A binary operation formula_3 on a set " S" that does not satisfy the associative law is called non-associative .
For such an operation the order of evaluation "does " matter .
Also note that infinite sums are not generally associative , for example :
The study of non-associative structures arises from reasons somewhat different from the mainstream of classical algebra .
One area within non-associative algebra that has grown very large is that of Lie algebras .
There the associative law is replaced by the Jacobi identity .
Lie algebras abstract the essential nature of infinitesimal transformations , and have become ubiquitous in mathematics .
There are other specific types of non-associative structures that have been studied in depth .
They tend to come from some specific applications .
In mathematics , addition and multiplication of real numbers is associative .
By contrast , in computer science , the addition and multiplication of floating point numbers is "not " associative , as rounding errors are introduced when dissimilar-sized values are joined together .
To illustrate this , consider a floating point representation with a 4-bit mantissa :
Even though most computers compute with a 24 or 53 bits of mantissa , this is an important source of rounding error , and approaches such as the Kahan Summation Algorithm are ways to minimise the errors .
It can be especially problematic in parallel computing .
In general , parentheses must be used to indicate the order of evaluation if a non-associative operation appears more than once in an expression .
However , mathematicians agree on a particular order of evaluation for several common non-associative operations .
This is simply a notational convention to avoid parentheses .
A left-associative operation is a non-associative operation that is conventionally evaluated from left to right , i .e . ,
while a right-associative operation is conventionally evaluated from right to left :
Non-associative operations for which no conventional evaluation order is defined include the following .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Amalaric ( Gothic : Amalareiks ) , or in Spanish and Portuguese , " Amalarico" , ( – 531 ) was king of the Visigoths from 526 until his death in battle in 531 .
He was a son of king Alaric II and his first wife Theodegotho , daughter of Theoderic the Great .
When Alaric II was killed fighting Clovis I , king of the Franks , in the Battle of Vouillé ( 507 ) , his kingdom fell into disarray .
" More serious than the destruction of the Gothic army , " writes Herwig Wolfram , " than the loss of both Aquitanian provinces and the capital of Toulose , was the death of the king . "
Alaric had made no provision for a successor , and although he had two sons , one was of age but illegitimate and the other the offspring of a legal marriage but still a child .
The older son , Gesalec , was chosen king but his reign was disastrous .
King Theoderic of the Ostrogoths sent an army , led by his sword-bearer Theudis , against Gesalec , ostensibly on behalf of Amalaric ; Gesalec fled to Africa .
The Ostrogoths then drove back the Franks and their Burgundian allies , regaining possession of " the south of Novempopulana , Rodez , probably even Albi , and even Toulose " .
Following the 511 death of Clovis , Theoderic negotiated a peace with Clovis ' successors , securing Visigothic control of the southernmost portion of Gaul for the rest of the existence of their kingdom .
In 522 the young Amalaric was proclaimed king , and four years later , on Theoderic 's death , he assumed full royal power .
His kingdom was faced with a threat from the north from the Franks ; according to Peter Heather , this was his motivation for marrying Chrotilda , the daughter of Clovis .
However , this was not successful , for according to Gregory of Tours , Amalaric pressured her to forsake her Roman Catholic faith and convert to Arian Christianity , at one point beating her until she bled ; she sent to her brother Childebert I , king of Paris a towel stained with her own blood .
It is worth noting Ian Woods advice that although Gregory provides the fullest information for this period , where it touches Merovingian affairs , he often "allowed his religious bias to determine his interpretation of the events . "
Peter Heather agrees with Wood 's implication in this instance : " I doubt that this is the full story , but the effects of Frankish intervention are clear enough . "
Childebert defeated the Visigothic army and took Narbonne .
Amalaric fled south to Barcelona , where according to Isidore of Seville , he was assassinated by his own men .
According to Peter Heather , Theoderic 's former governor Theudis was implicated in Amalaric 's murder , " and was certainly its prime beneficiary . "
As for Chrotilda , in Gregory 's words she died on the journey home " by some ill chance " .
Childebert had her body brought to Paris where she was buried alongside her father Clovis .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Amines are organic compounds and functional groups that contain a basic nitrogen atom with a lone pair .
Amines are derivatives of ammonia , wherein one or more hydrogen atoms have been replaced by a substituent such as an alkyl or aryl group .
Important amines include amino acids , biogenic amines , trimethylamine , and aniline ; see :Category :Amines for a list of amines .
Inorganic derivatives of ammonia are also called amines , such as chloramine (NClH2 ) ; see :Category :Inorganic amines .
Compounds with the nitrogen atom attached to a carbonyl of the structure R–CO–NR′R″ are called amides and have different chemical properties from amines .
An aliphatic amine has no aromatic ring attached directly to the nitrogen atom .
Aromatic amines have the nitrogen atom connected to an aromatic ring as in the various anilines .
The aromatic ring decreases the alkalinity of the amine , depending on its substituents .
The presence of an amine group strongly increases the reactivity of the aromatic ring , due to an electron-donating effect .
It is also possible to have four organic substituents on the nitrogen .
These species are not amines but are quaternary ammonium cations and have a charged nitrogen center .
Quaternary ammonium salts exist with many kinds of anions .
Typically , the compound is given the prefix "amino-" or the suffix : "-amine " .
The prefix "N-" shows substitution on the nitrogen atom .
An organic compound with multiple amino groups is called a diamine , triamine , tetraamine and so forth .
Hydrogen bonding significantly influences the properties of primary and secondary amines .
Thus the boiling point of amines is higher than those of the corresponding phosphines , but generally lower than those of the corresponding alcohols .
For example , methylamine and ethylamine are gases under standard conditions , whereas the corresponding methyl alcohol and ethyl alcohols are liquids .
Gaseous amines possess a characteristic ammonia smell , liquid amines have a distinctive "fishy " smell .
Also reflecting their ability to form hydrogen bonds , most aliphatic amines display some solubility in water .
Solubility decreases with the increase in the number of carbon atoms .
Aliphatic amines display significant solubility in organic solvents , especially polar organic solvents .
Primary amines react with ketones such as acetone .
The aromatic amines , such as aniline , have their lone pair electrons conjugated into the benzene ring , thus their tendency to engage in hydrogen bonding is diminished .
Their boiling points are high and their solubility in water is low .
Amines of the type NHRR′ and NRR′R″ are chiral : the nitrogen atom bears four substituents counting the lone pair .
The energy barrier for the inversion of the stereocenter is relatively low , e.g. , ~7 kcal/mol for a trialkylamine .
The interconversion of the stereoisomers has been compared to the inversion of an open umbrella into a strong wind .
Because of this low barrier , amines such as NHRR′ cannot be resolved optically and NRR′R″ can only be resolved when the R, R′ , and R″ groups are constrained in cyclic structures such as aziridines .
Quaternary ammonium salts with four distinct groups on the nitrogen are capable of exhibiting optical activity .
Compared to alkali metal hydroxides , amines are weaker ( see table for examples of conjugate acid Ka values ) .
The nitrogen atom features a lone electron pair that can bind H+ to form an ammonium ion R3NH+ .
The lone electron pair is represented in this article by a two dots above or next to the N.
The water solubility of simple amines is largely due to hydrogen bonding between protons in the water molecules and these lone electron pairs .
The solvation of protonated amines changes upon their conversion to ammonium compounds .
Typically salts of ammonium compounds exhibit the following order of solubility in water : primary ammonium ( RNH3+ ) > secondary ammonium ( R2NH2+ ) > tertiary ammonium ( R3NH+ ) .
Quaternary ammonium salts usually exhibit the lowest solubility of the series .
In sterically hindered amines , as in the case of trimethylamine , the protonated form is not well-solvated .
For this reason the parent amine is less basic than expected .
In the case of aprotic polar solvents ( like DMSO and DMF) , wherein the extent of solvation is not as high as in protic polar solvents ( like water and methanol ) , the basicity of amines is almost solely governed by the electronic factors within the molecule .
The most industrially significant amines are prepared from ammonia by alkylation with alcohols :
These reactions require catalysts , specialized apparatus , and additional purification measures since the selectivity can be problematic .
The same amines can be prepared by treatment of haloalkanes with ammonia and amines :
Such reactions , which are most useful for alkyl iodides and bromides , are rarely employed because the degree of alkylation is difficult to control .
Via the process of hydrogenation , nitriles are reduced to amines using hydrogen in the presence of a nickel catalyst .
Reactions are sensitive acidic or alkaline conditions , which can cause hydrolysis of -CN group .
LiAlH4 is more commonly employed for the reduction of nitriles on the laboratory scale .
Many amines are produced from aldehydes and ketones via reductive amination , which can either proceed catalytically or stoichiometrically .
Aniline ( C6H5NH2 ) and its derivatives are prepared by reduction of the nitroaromatics .
In industry , hydrogen is the preferred reductant , whereas in the laboratory , tin and iron are often employed .
Many laboratory methods exist for the preparation of amines , many of these methods being rather specialized .
Aside from their basicity , the dominant reactivity of amines is their nucleophilicity .
Most primary amines are good ligands for metal ions to give coordination complexes .
Acyl chlorides and acid anhydrides react with primary and secondary amines to form amides ( the " Schotten–Baumann reaction " ) .
This transformation , known as the Hinsberg reaction , is a chemical test for the presence of amines .
Because amines are basic , they neutralize acids to form the corresponding ammonium salts R3NH+ .
When formed from carboxylic acids and primary and secondary amines , these salts thermally dehydrate to form the corresponding amides .
Amines react with nitrous acid to give diazonium salts .
The alkyl diazonium salts are of little synthetic importance because they are too unstable .
The most important members are derivatives of aromatic amines such as aniline ( "phenylamine " ) ( A = aryl or naphthyl ) :
Anilines and naphthylamines form more stable diazonium salts , which can be isolated in the crystalline form .
Diazonium salts undergo a variety of useful transformations involving replacement of the N2 group with anions .
For example , cuprous cyanide gives the corresponding nitriles :
Aryldiazonium couple with electron-rich aromatic compounds such as a phenol to form azo compounds .
Such reactions are widely applied to the production of dyes .
Primary amines react with ketones and aldehydes to form imines .
In the case of formaldehyde ( R′ = H) , these products typically exist as cyclic trimers .
Similarly , secondary amines react with ketones and aldehydes to form enamines :
An overview of the reactions of amine is given below :
The breakdown of amino acids releases amines , famously in the case of decaying fish which smell of trimethylamine .
Many neurotransmitters are amines , including epinephrine , norepinephrine , dopamine , serotonin , and histamine .
Protonated amino groups (-NH3+ ) are the most common positively charged moieties in proteins , specifically in the amino acid lysine .
The anionic polymer DNA is typically bound to various amine-rich proteins .
Additionally , the terminal charged primary ammonium on lysine forms salt bridges with carboxylate groups of other amino acids in polypeptides , which is one of the primary influences on the three-dimensional structures of proteins .
Primary aromatic amines are used as a starting material for the manufacture of azo dyes .
It reacts with nitrous acid to form diazonium salt , which can undergo coupling reaction to form azo compound .
As azo-compounds are highly coloured , they are widely used in dyeing industries , such as :
Many drugs are designed to mimic or to interfere with the action of natural amine neurotransmitters , exemplified by the amine drugs :
Aqueous monoethanolamine ( MEA ) , diglycolamine ( DGA ) , diethanolamine ( DEA ) , diisopropanolamine ( DIPA ) and methyldiethanolamine ( MDEA ) are widely used industrially for removing carbon dioxide ( CO2 ) and hydrogen sulfide ( H2S ) from natural gas and refinery process streams .
They may also be used to remove CO2 from combustion gases / flue gases and may have potential for abatement of greenhouse gases .
Low molecular weight amines , such as ethylamine , are toxic , and some are easily absorbed through the skin .
Many higher molecular weight amines are , biologically , highly active .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
The Aare , or Aar ( French " Aar" , German " Aare" , .
All municipalities passed by the river speak German . ) is a tributary of the High Rhine and the longest river that both rises and ends entirely within Switzerland .
Its total length from its source to its junction with the Rhine comprises about 295 km ( 183 miles ) , during which distance it descends , draining an area of , almost entirely within Switzerland , and accounting for close to half the area of the country , including all of Central Switzerland .
There are more than 40 hydroelectric plants along the course of the Aare River .
The river 's name dates to at least the La Tène period , and it is attested as " Nantaror " " Aare valley " in the Berne zinc tablet which dates back to Roman Gaul .
The Aare rises in the great Aargletschers ( Aare Glaciers ) of the Bernese Alps , in the canton of Bern and west of the Grimsel Pass .
The Unteraargletscher ( Lower Aare-Glacier ) is the main source of the water , for the source Lake Grimsel , along with the Finsteraargletscher , Oberaargletscher ( Upper Aare-Glacier ) , and Lauteraargletscher .
It runs east to the Grimsel Hospice , below the Finsteraarhorn , and then northwest through the Haslital , forming on the way the magnificent Handegg Waterfall , , past Guttannen .
Between Innertkirchen and Meiringen , the river carves through a limestone ridge in the Aare Gorge or " Aareschlucht " .
It is here that the Aare proves itself to be more than just a river , as it attracts thousands of tourists annually to the causeways through the gorge .
A little past Meiringen , near Brienz , the river expands into Lake Brienz .
Near the west end of the lake it receives its first important tributary , the Lütschine .
It then runs across the swampy plain of the Bödeli between Interlaken and Unterseen before flowing into Lake Thun .
Near the west end of Lake Thun , the river receives the waters of the Kander , which has just been joined by the Simme .
On flowing out of the lake it passes through Thun , and then flows through the city of Bern , passing beneath eighteen bridges and around the steeply-flanked peninsula on which the Old City is located .
The river soon changes its northwesterly flow for a due westerly direction , but after receiving the Saane or Sarine it turns north until it nears Aarberg .
There , in one of the major Swiss engineering feats of the 19th century , the Jura water correction , the river , which had previously rendered the countryside north of Bern a swampland through frequent flooding , was diverted by the Hagneck Canal into the Lake of Bienne .
From the upper end of the lake , at Nidau , the river issues through the Nidau-Büren channel , also called the Aare Canal , and then runs east to Büren .
The lake absorbs huge amounts of eroded gravel and snowmelt that the river brings from the Alps , and the former swamps have become fruitful plains : they are known as the "vegetable garden of Switzerland " .
From here the Aare flows northeast for a long distance , past the ambassador town Solothurn ( below which the Grosse Emme flows in on the right ) , Aarburg ( where it is joined by the Wigger ) , Olten , Aarau , near which is the junction with the Suhre , and Wildegg , where the Hallwiler Aa falls in on the right .
A short distance further , below Brugg it receives first the Reuss , and shortly afterwards the Limmat .
It now turns due north , and soon becomes itself a tributary of the Rhine , which it surpasses in volume when the two rivers unite at Koblenz ( Switzerland ) , opposite Waldshut , Germany .
The Rhine , in turn , empties into the North Sea after crossing into the Netherlands .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Abbotsford is a historic country house in the Scottish Borders , at the town of Galashiels , near Melrose , on the south bank of the River Tweed .
It was formerly the residence of historical novelist and poet , Walter Scott ( Sir Walter Scott ,Bt ) .
The nucleus of the estate was a small farm of , called Cartleyhole , nicknamed Clarty ( i .e . , muddy ) Hole , and was bought by Scott on the lapse of his lease ( 1811 ) of the neighbouring house of Ashestiel .
He first built a small villa and named it Abbotsford , creating the name from a ford nearby where previously abbots of Melrose Abbey used to cross the river .
Scott then built additions to the house and made it into a mansion , building into the walls many sculptured stones from ruined castles and abbeys of Scotland .
In it he gathered a large library , a collection of ancient furniture , arms and armour , and other relics and curiosities , especially connected with Scottish history , notably the Celtic Torrs Pony-cap and Horns and the Woodwrae Stone , all now in the Museum of Scotland .
The last and principal acquisition was that of Toftfield ( afterwards named Huntlyburn ) , purchased in 1817 .
The new house was then begun and completed in 1824 .
The general ground-plan is a parallelogram , with irregular outlines , one side overlooking the Tweed ; and the style is mainly the Scottish Baronial .
Into various parts of the fabric were built relics and curiosities from historical structures , such as the doorway of the old Tolbooth in Edinburgh .
Scott had only enjoyed his residence one year when ( 1825 ) he met with that reverse of fortune which involved the estate in debt .
In 1830 the library and museum were presented to him as a free gift by the creditors .
The property was wholly disencumbered in 1847 by Robert Cadell , the publisher , who cancelled the bond upon it in exchange for the family 's share in the copyright of Sir Walter 's works .
Scott 's only son Walter did not live to enjoy the property , having died on his way from India in 1847 .
Among subsequent possessors were Scott 's son-in-law , John Gibson Lockhart , J. R. Hope Scott , QC , and his daughter ( Scott 's great-granddaughter ) , the Hon .
The house was opened to the public in 1833 , but continued to be occupied by Scott 's descendants until 2004 .
The last of his direct descendants to inhabit Abbotsford was his great-great-great-granddaughter Dame Jean Maxwell-Scott ( 8 June 1923 - 5 May 2004 ) .
She inherited it from her elder sister Patricia in 1998 .
The sisters turned the house into one of Scotland 's premier tourist attractions after they had to rely on paying visitors to afford the upkeep of the house .
Dame Jean was at one time a lady-in-waiting to Princess Alice , Duchess of Gloucester , patron of the Dandie Dinmont Club , a breed of dog named after one of Sir Walter Scott 's characters ; and a horse trainer , one of whose horses , Sir Wattie , ridden by Ian Stark , won two silver medals at the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul , South Korea .
Scottish Borders Council is considering an application by a property developer to build a housing estate on the opposite bank of the River Tweed from Abbotsford , to which Historic Scotland and the National Trust for Scotland object .
Sir Walter Scott rescued the " jougs " from Threave Castle in Dumfries and Galloway and attached them to the castellated gateway he built at Abbotsford .
Abbotsford gave its name to the Abbotsford Club , founded by William Barclay Turnbull in 1833 or 1834 in Scott 's honour , and a successor to the Bannatyne and Maitland Clubs .
It was a text publication society , which existed to print and publish historical works connected with Scott 's writings .
In keeping with its many Walter Scott references , Rose Street in Edinburgh has a bar called the " Kenilworth" , along with one named the " Abbotsford " .
In 2012 , a new Visitors Centre opened at Abbotsford which houses a small exhibition , Ochiltrees Diner and a gift shop
In 2014 it won the European Union Prize for Cultural Heritage / Europa Nostra Award for its recent conservation project .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Alaric I ( ; d . 410 ) was the King of the Visigoths from 395–410 .
Alaric is most famous for his sack of Rome in 410 , which marked a decisive event in the decline of the Roman Empire .
Alaric 's first appearance was as the leader of a mixed band of Goths and allied peoples who invaded Thrace in 391 , who were stopped by the half-Vandal Roman General Stilicho .
Later joining the Roman army , he began his career under the Gothic soldier Gainas .
In 394 Alaric led a Gothic force of 20,000 that helped the Eastern Roman Emperor Theodosius defeat the Frankish usurper Arbogast at the Battle of Frigidus .
Despite sacrificing around 10,000 of his men , Alaric received little recognition from the Emperor .
Disappointed , he left the army and was elected reiks of the Visigoths in 395 , and marched toward Constantinople until he was diverted by Roman forces .
He then moved southward into Greece , where he sacked Piraeus ( the port of Athens ) and destroyed Corinth , Megara , Argos , and Sparta .
As a response , the Eastern emperor Flavius Arcadius appointed Alaric magister militum ( “master of the soldiers” ) in Illyricum .
In 401 Alaric invaded Italy , but he was defeated by Stilicho at Pollentia ( modern Pollenza ) on April 6 , 402 .
A second invasion also ended in defeat at the Battle of Verona , though Alaric forced the Roman Senate to pay a large subsidy to the Visigoths .
During the Italian invasion of Radagaisus Alaric remained idle in Illyria .
In 408 , Western Emperor Flavius Honorius ordered the execution of Stilicho and his family , amid rumours that the general had made a deal with Alaric .
Honorius then incited the Roman population to massacre tens of thousands of wives and children of Goths serving in the Roman military .
Subsequently , around 30,000 Gothic soldiers defected to Alaric , and joined his march on Rome to avenge their murdered families .
Moving swiftly along Roman roads , Alaric sacked the cities of Aquileia and Cremona and ravaged the lands along the Adriatic Sea .
The Visigothic leader thereupon laid siege upon Rome in 408 .
Eventually , the Senate granted him a substantial subsidy .
In addition , Alaric forced the Senate to liberate all 40,000 Gothic slaves in Rome .
Honorius , however , refused to appoint Alaric as the commander of the Western Roman Army , and in 409 the Visigoths again surrounded Rome .
Alaric lifted his blockade after proclaiming Attalus as Western Emperor .
Attalus appointed him magister utriusque militiae ( “master of both services” ) but refused to allow him to send an army into Africa .
Negotiations with Honorius broke down , and Alaric deposed Attalus in the summer of 410 , and besieged Rome for the third time .
Allies within the capital opened the gates for him on August 24 , and for three days his troops sacked the city .
Although the Visigoths plundered Rome , they treated its inhabitants humanely and burned only a few buildings .
Having abandoned a plan to occupy Sicily and North Africa after the destruction of his fleet in a storm , Alaric died as the Visigoths were marching northward .
Born on Peuce Island at the mouth of the Danube in present day Romania , Alaric belonged to the noble Balti dynasty of the Tervingian Goths .
After their setbacks against the Huns , Alaric was probably a child during the Goths ' mass migration across the Danube and their subsequent war with Rome .
During the fourth century , the Roman emperors commonly employed "foederati" : Germanic irregular troops under Roman command , but organized by tribal structures .
To spare the provincial populations from excessive taxation and to save money , emperors began to employ units recruited from Germanic tribes .
The largest of these contingents was that of the Goths , who in 382 , had been allowed to settle within the imperial boundaries , keeping a large degree of autonomy .
In 394 Alaric served as a leader of "foederati" under Theodosius I in the campaign which crushed the usurper Eugenius .
As the Battle of the Frigidus , which terminated this campaign , was fought at the passes of the Julian Alps , Alaric probably learned the weakness of Italy 's natural defences on its northeastern frontier at the head of the Adriatic .
Theodosius died in 395 , leaving the Empire to be divided between his two sons Arcadius and Honorius , the former taking the eastern and the latter , the western portion of the Empire .
Arcadius showed little interest in ruling , leaving most of the actual power to his Praetorian Prefect Rufinus .
Honorius was still a minor ; as his guardian , Theodosius had appointed the "magister militum " Stilicho .
Stilicho also claimed to be the guardian of Arcadius , causing much rivalry between the western and eastern courts .
According to Edward Gibbon in " The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire" , during the shifting of offices that took place at the beginning of the new reigns , Alaric apparently hoped he would be promoted from a mere commander to the rank of general in one of the regular armies .
Among the Visigoths settled in Lower Moesia , the situation was ripe for rebellion .
They had suffered disproportionately great losses at Frigidus .
And according to rumour , exposing the Visigoths in battle was a convenient way of weakening the Gothic tribes .
This , combined with their post-battle rewards , prompted them to raise Alaric "on a shield " and proclaim him king ; according to Jordanes ( a Gothic historian of varying importance , depending upon who is asked ) , both the new king and his people decided "rather to seek new kingdoms by their own work , than to slumber in peaceful subjection to the rule of others . "
He marched to the neighborhood of Constantinople but , finding himself unable to undertake a siege , retraced his steps westward and then marched southward through Thessaly and the unguarded pass of Thermopylae into Greece .
The armies of the eastern empire were occupied with Hunnic incursions in Asia Minor and Syria .
Instead , Rufinus attempted to negotiate with Alaric in person , which only aroused suspicions in Constantinople that Rufinius was in league with the Goths .
According to Claudian , Stilicho was in a position to destroy the Goths when he was ordered by Arcadius to leave Illyricum .
Soon after , Rufinus ' own soldiers hacked him to death .
Power in Constantinople now passed to the eunuch Chamberlain Eutropius .
Rufinus ' death and Stilicho 's departure gave free rein to Alaric 's movements ; he ravaged Attica but spared Athens , which capitulated at once to the conqueror .
In 396 , he wiped out the last remnants of the Mysteries at Eleusis in Attica , ending a tradition of esoteric religious ceremonies that had lasted since the Bronze Age .
Then he penetrated into the Peloponnesus and captured its most famous cities—Corinth , Argos , and Sparta—selling many of their inhabitants into slavery .
Here , however , his victorious career suffered a serious setback .
In 397 Stilicho crossed the sea to Greece and succeeded in trapping the Goths in the mountains of Pholoe , on the borders of Elis and Arcadia in the peninsula .
From there Alaric escaped with difficulty , and not without some suspicion of connivance by Stilicho , who supposedly had again received orders to depart .
Alaric then crossed the Gulf of Corinth and marched with the plunder of Greece northward to Epirus .
Here his rampage continued until the eastern government appointed him "magister militum per Illyricum" , giving him the Roman command he had desired , as well as the authority to resupply his men from the imperial arsenals .
It was probably in 401 that Alaric made his first invasion of Italy , originally with the intention to petition for a position closer to Rome .
Alaric had a fascination for the 'golden age ' of Rome and insisted on his tribesmen calling him ' Alaricus ' .
Supernatural influences were not lacking to urge him to this great enterprise .
Some lines of the Roman poet Claudian inform us that he heard a voice proceeding from a sacred grove , " Break off all delays , Alaric .
This very year thou shalt force the Alpine barrier of Italy ; thou shalt penetrate to the city . "
But the prophecy was not to be fulfilled at this time .
After spreading desolation through North Italy and striking terror into the citizens of Rome , Alaric was met by Stilicho at Pollentia , today in Piedmont .
The battle which followed on April 6 , 402 ( coinciding with Easter ) , was a victory for Rome , though a costly one .
Stilicho 's enemies later reproached him for having gained his victory by taking impious advantage of the great Christian festival .
Alaric , too , was outwardly a Christian , though an Arian , not Orthodox though he continued to practice the Pagan rituals of his ancestors as well as observing Christian ritual practices .
He had trusted to the sanctity of Easter for immunity from attack .
Alaric 's wife was reportedly taken prisoner after this battle ; it is not unreasonable to suppose that he and his troops were hampered by the presence of large numbers of women and children , which gave his invasion of Italy the character of a human migration .
After another defeat before Verona , Alaric left Italy , probably in 403 .
He had not "penetrated to the city " but his invasion of Italy had produced important results .
It caused the imperial residence to be transferred from Milan to Ravenna , and necessitated the withdrawal of Legio XX " Valeria Victrix " from Britain .
Alaric became the friend and ally of his late opponent , Stilicho .
By 407 , the estrangement between the eastern and western courts had become so bitter that it threatened civil war .
Stilicho actually proposed using Alaric 's troops to enforce Honorius ' claim to the prefecture of Illyricum .
The death of Arcadius in May 408 caused milder counsel to prevail in the western court , but Alaric , who had actually entered Epirus , demanded in a somewhat threatening manner that if he were thus suddenly requested to desist from war , he should be paid handsomely for what modern language would call the "expenses of mobilization " .
The sum which he named was a large one , 4,000 pounds of gold .
Under strong pressure from Stilicho , the Roman Senate consented to promise its payment .
But three months later , Stilicho and the chief ministers of his party were treacherously slain on Honorius ' orders .
In the unrest that followed throughout Italy , the wives and children of the foederati were slain .
Consequently , these 30,000 men flocked to Alaric 's camp , clamouring to be led against their cowardly enemies .
He accordingly led them across the Julian Alps and , in September 408 , stood before the walls of Rome ( now with no capable general like Stilicho as a defender ) and began a strict blockade .
No blood was shed this time ; Alaric relied on hunger as his most powerful weapon .
When the ambassadors of the Senate , entreating for peace , tried to intimidate him with hints of what the despairing citizens might accomplish , he laughed and gave his celebrated answer : " The thicker the hay , the easier mowed ! "
After much bargaining , the famine-stricken citizens agreed to pay a ransom of 5,000 pounds of gold , 30,000 pounds of silver , 4,000 silken tunics , 3,000 hides dyed scarlet , and 3,000 pounds of pepper .
Throughout his career , Alaric 's primary goal was not to undermine the Empire , but to secure for himself a regular and recognized position within the Empire 's borders .
His demands were certainly grand : the concession of a block of territory 200 miles long by 150 wide between the Danube and the Gulf of Venice ( to be held probably on some terms of nominal dependence on the Empire ) and the title of commander-in-chief of the Imperial Army .
Immense as his terms were , the emperor would have been well advised to grant them .
Honorius , however , refused to see beyond his own safety , guaranteed by the dikes and marshes of Ravenna .
As all attempts to conduct a satisfactory negotiation with this emperor failed , Alaric , after instituting a second siege and blockade of Rome in 409 , came to terms with the Senate .
With their consent , he set up a rival emperor , the prefect of the city , a Greek named Priscus Attalus .
Alaric cashiered his ineffectual puppet emperor after eleven months and again tried to reopen negotiations with Honorius .
These negotiations might have succeeded had it not been for the malignant influence of another Goth , Sarus , an Amali , and therefore hereditary enemy of Alaric and his house .
Alaric , again outwitted by an enemy 's machinations , marched southward and in deadly earnest , began his third siege of Rome .
Apparently , defence was impossible ; there are hints , not well substantiated , of treachery ; surprise is a more likely explanation .
However , this may be—for our information at this point of the story is meagre—on August 24 410 , Alaric and his Visigoths burst in by the Porta Salaria on the northeast of the city .
Rome , for so long victorious against its enemies , was now at the mercy of its foreign conquerors .
The contemporary ecclesiastics recorded with wonder many instances of the Visigoths ' clemency : Christian churches saved from ravage ; protection granted to vast multitudes both of pagans and Christians who took refuge therein ; vessels of gold and silver which were found in a private dwelling , spared because they "belonged to St . Peter " ; at least one case in which a beautiful Roman matron appealed , not in vain , to the better feelings of the Gothic soldier who attempted her dishonor .
But even these exceptional instances show that Rome was not entirely spared the horrors which usually accompany the storming of a besieged city .
Nonetheless , the written sources do not mention damages wrought by fire , save the Gardens of Sallust , which were situated close to the gate by which the Goths had made their entrance ; nor is there any reason to attribute any extensive destruction of the buildings of the city to Alaric and his followers .
The Basilica Aemilia in the Roman Forum did burn down , in many flames which perhaps can be attributed to Alaric : the archaeological evidence was provided by coins dating from 410 found melted in the floor .
The pagan emperors ' tombs of the Mausoleum of Augustus and Castel Sant'Angelo were rifled and the ashes scattered .
Alaric , having penetrated the city , marched southwards into Calabria .
He desired to invade Africa , which , thanks to its grain , had become the key to holding Italy .
But a storm battered his ships into pieces and many of his soldiers drowned .
Alaric died soon after in Cosenza , probably of fever , and his body was , according to legend , buried under the riverbed of the Busento in accordance with the Pagan practices of the Visigothic people .
The stream was temporarily turned aside from its course while the grave was dug wherein the Gothic chief and some of his most precious spoils were interred .
When the work was finished , the river was turned back into its usual channel and the captives by whose hands the labor had been accomplished were put to death that none might learn their secret .
Alaric was succeeded in the command of the Gothic army by his brother-in-law , Ataulf , who married Honorius ' sister Galla Placidia three years later .
The chief authorities on the career of Alaric are : the historian Orosius and the poet Claudian , both contemporary , neither disinterested ; Zosimus , a historian who lived probably about half a century after Alaric 's death ; and Jordanes , a Goth who wrote the history of his nation in 551 , basing his work on The Trojan War .
The legend of Alaric 's burial in the Buzita River comes from Jordanes .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
The Alexandrists were a school of Renaissance philosophers who , in the great controversy on the subject of personal immortality , adopted the explanation of the " De Anima " given by Alexander of Aphrodisias .
According to the orthodox Thomism of the Roman Catholic Church , Aristotle rightly regarded reason as a facility of the individual soul .
Against this , the Averroists , led by Agostino Nifo , introduced the modifying theory that universal reason in a sense individualizes itself in each soul and then absorbs the active reason into itself again .
These two theories respectively evolved the doctrine of individual and universal immortality , or the absorption of the individual into the eternal One .
The Alexandrists , led by Pietro Pomponazzi , assailed these beliefs and denied that either was rightly attributed to Aristotle .
They held that Aristotle considered the soul as a material and therefore a mortal entity which operates during life only under the authority of universal reason .
Hence the Alexandrists denied the Aristotle viewed the soul as immortal , because in their view , since they believed that Aristotle viewed the soul as organically connected with the body , the dissolution of the latter involves the extinction of the former .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Alfonso XII ( Spanish : " Alfonso Francisco de Asís Fernando Pío Juan María de la Concepción Gregorio Pelayo " ; English : " Alphonse XII" ) ( 28 November 1857 , in Madrid – 25 November 1885 , in El Pardo ) was King of Spain , reigning from 1874 to 1885 , after a " coup d 'état " restored the monarchy and ended the ephemeral First Spanish Republic .
Having been forced into exile after the Glorious Revolution deposed his mother Isabella II from the throne in 1868 , Alfonso studied in Austria and France .
His mother abdicated in his favour in 1870 , and he returned to Spain as king in 1874 following a military coup .
Alfonso died aged 27 in 1885 , and was succeeded by his unborn son , who became Alfonso XIII on his birth the following year .
Alfonso was the eldest son of Queen Isabella II of Spain .
Officially , his father was her husband Francis , Duke of Cádiz .
Alfonso 's biological paternity is uncertain : there is speculation that his biological father may have been Enrique Puigmoltó y Mayans ( a captain of the guard ) .
These rumours were used as political propaganda against Alfonso by the Carlists .
His mother 's accession created the second cause of instability , which was the Carlist Wars .
The supporters of the Count of Molina as king of Spain rose to have him enthroned .
In addition , within the context of the post-Napoleonic restorations and revolutions which engulfed the West both in Europe and the Americas , both the Carlistas as well as the Isabelino conservatives were opposed to the new Napoleonic constitutional system .
Much like in Britain , who subtracted itself from the liberal constitutional process , Spanish conservatives wanted to continue with the Traditional Spanish Organic Laws such as the Fuero Juzgo , the Novísima Recopilación and the Partidas of Alfonso X .
This led to the third cause of instability of worth , the " Independence of the American Kingdoms " , recognized between 1823 and 1850 .
When Queen Isabella and her husband were forced to leave Spain by the Revolution of 1868 , Alfonso accompanied them to Paris .
From there , he was sent to the Theresianum at Vienna to continue his studies .
On 25 June 1870 , he was recalled to Paris , where his mother abdicated in his favour , in the presence of a number of Spanish nobles who had tied their fortunes to that of the exiled queen .
He assumed the title of Alfonso XII , for although no King of united Spain had borne the name " Alfonso XI" , the Spanish monarchy was regarded as continuous with the more ancient monarchy represented by the 11 kings of Asturias , León and Castile also named Alfonso .
After Amadeo 's abandonment in 1873 , Parliament declared the Federal Republic ( including Cuba , Puerto Rico and the Pacific Archipelagos ) , the first act of President Estanislao Figueras was to extend the Abolition Act to Puerto Rico .
Cuban slaves would have to wait until 1889 .
But the republicans were not in agreement either , and they had to contend with the War in Cuba , Muslim uprisings in Spanish Morocco and the continuance of the Carlist Wars .
This led to the creation of a group in favor of the Bourbon restoration , made by some sectors of the moderates led by Canovas del Castillo .
The Prince of Asturias , Alfonso , was the person chosen to develop the new road map proposed by Canovas , which led to the June 1870 abdication of Queen Isabel II in favour of her son Prince Alfonso .
The new road map which indeed ended the eternal crisis begun in 1810 was called ' Alfonsismo ' and the moderate centrist Cánovas del Castillo became the spokesman .
As having Alfonso in Spain , would be a problem Cánovas became responsible for his education .
So , he sent Alfonso to the Sandhurst Military Academy in England , where the training Alfonso received was severe but more cosmopolitan than Spain , given the current atmosphere .
In 1 December 1874 , Alfonso issued the Sandhurst Manifesto , where he set the ideological basis of the Bourbon Restoration .
It was drafted in reply to a birthday greeting from his followers , a manifesto proclaiming himself the sole representative of the Spanish monarchy .
At the end of 1874 , Brigadier Martínez Campos , who had long been working more or less openly for the king , led some battalions of the central army to Sagunto , rallied to his own flag the troops sent against him , and entered Valencia in the king 's name .
Thereupon the President resigned , and his power was transferred to the king 's plenipotentiary and adviser , Antonio Cánovas .
The 29 December 1874 military coup of Gen . Martinez Campos in Sagunto ended the failed republic and meant the rise of the young Prince Alfonso .
Within a few days after Canovas del Castillo took power as Premier , the new king , proclaimed on 29 December 1874 , arrived at Madrid , passing through Barcelona and Valencia and was acclaimed everywhere ( 1875 ) .
In 1876 , a vigorous campaign against the Carlists , in which the young king took part , resulted in the defeat of Don Carlos and the Duke 's abandonment of the struggle .
Initially led by Canovas del Castillo as moderate prime minister , what was thought at one time as a coup aimed at placing the military in the political-administrative positions of power , in reality ushered in a permanent civilian regime that lasted until the 1931 Second Republic .
Cánovas was the real architect of the new regime of the Restoration .
In order to eliminate one of the problems of the reign of Isabel II , the single party and its destabilizing consequences , the Liberal Party was allowed to incorporate and participate in national politics , and the 'turnismo ' or alternation was to become the new system .
Turnismo would be endorsed in the Constitution of 1876 and the Pact of Pardo Palace ( 1885 ) .
It meant that a liberal and conservative prime ministers would succeed each other ending thus the troubles .
This led to the end of the Carlist revolts and the victory over the New York-backed Cuban revolutionaries , and led to a huge backing both by insular and peninsular Spaniards of Alfonso as a wise and able king .
Alfonso 's short reign established the foundations for the final socioeconomic recuperation of Spain after the 1808–1874 crisis .
Both European ( the coastal regions , such as the Basque Country , Catalonia , and Asturias ) and Overseas – Antilles and Pacific were able to grow steadily .
Cuba and Puerto Rico prospered to the point that Spain 's first train was between Havana and Camaguey , and the world 's first telegraph was in Puerto Rico , as Samuel Morse lived there with his daughter , married to a Puerto Rican businessman .
Upon the American invasion of Puerto Rico , 10 US dollars were needed to buy 1 Puerto Rican peso .
On 23 January 1878 at the Basilica of Atocha in Madrid , Alfonso married his first cousin , Princess Maria de las Mercedes , daughter of Antoine , Duke of Montpensier , but she died within six months of the marriage .
On 29 November 1879 at the Basilica of Atocha in Madrid , Alfonso married a much more distant relative , Maria Christina of Austria , daughter of Archduke Karl Ferdinand of Austria and of his wife Archduchess Elisabeth of Austria .
During the honeymoon , a pastry cook named Otero fired at the young sovereign and his wife as they were driving in Madrid .
In 1881 Alfonso refused to sanction a law by which the ministers were to remain in office for a fixed term of 18 months .
Upon the consequent resignation of Canovas del Castillo , he summoned Práxedes Mateo Sagasta , the Liberal leader , to form a new cabinet .
In November 1885 , Alfonso died , just short of his 28th birthday , at the Royal Palace of El Pardo .
He had been suffering from tuberculosis , but the immediate cause of his death was a recurrence of dysentery .
In 1902 , his widow Maria Cristina initiated a national contest to build a monument in memory of Alfonso .
The winning design , by José Grases Riera , was erected in an artificial lake in Madrid 's Parque del Buen Retiro in 1922 .
Coming to the throne at such an early age , Alfonso had served no apprenticeship in the art of ruling , but he possessed great natural tact and a sound judgment ripened by the trials of exile .
Benevolent and sympathetic in disposition , he won the affection of his people by fearlessly visiting districts ravaged by cholera or devastated by earthquake in 1885 .
His capacity for dealing with men was considerable , and he never allowed himself to become the instrument of any particular party .
During his short reign , peace was established both at home and abroad , finances were well regulated , and the various administrative services were placed on a basis that afterwards enabled Spain to pass through the disastrous war with the United States without the threat of a revolution .
Alfonso had two sons by Elena Armanda Nicolasa Sanz y Martínez de Arizala ( Castellón de la Plana , 15 December 1849 – Paris , 24 December 1898 ) :
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Alphonsus a Sancta Maria , or Alphonso de Cartagena ( 1396 – July 12 , 1456 ) , Spanish historian , was born at Cartagena , and succeeded his father , Paulus , as bishop of Burgos .
In 1431 he was deputed by John II , king of Castile , to attend the council of Basel , in which he made himself conspicuous by his learning .
He was the author of several works , the principal of which is entitled " Rerum Hispanorum Romanorum imperatorum , summorum pontificum , nec non regum Francorum anacephaleosis " .
This is a history of Spain from the earliest times down to 1456 , and was printed at Granada in 1545 , and also in the " Rerum Hispanicarum Scriptores aliquot" , by R. Bel ( Frankfort , 1579 ) .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
1143 ) , English chronicler , was sacristan of the church of Beverley in the first half of the twelfth century .
He wrote , apparently about the year 1143 , a chronicle entitled " Annales sive Historia de gestis regum Britanniae" , which begins with Brutus and carries the history of England down to 1129 .
Geoffrey of Monmouth and Simeon of Durham are Alfred 's chief sources .
Alfred of Beverley , was a priest of Beverley , and is described in the preface to his book as " treasurer of the church of Beverley " and " Master Alfred , sacrist of the church of Beverley " .
Alfred of Beverley speaks of himself as contemporary with the removal of the Flemings from the north of England to Ross in Herefordshire in 1112 , and writes that he compiled his chronicle " when the church was silent , owing to the number of persons excommunicated under the decree of the council of London " , an apparent reference to the council held at Mid-Lent , 1143 .
His attention , by his own account , was first drawn to history by the publication ( before 1139 ) of Geoffrey of Monmouth 's " Historia Britonum" , and he looked forward to following up the chronicle which bears his name , and which largely depends on Geoffrey 's work , with a collection of excerpts from the credible portions of the " Historia Britonum" , but no trace of such a work is extant .
Alfred of Beverley 's chronicle is entitled " Aluredi Beverlacensis Annales sive Historia de gestis Regum Britanniæ libris ix .
It is largely devoted to the fabulous history of Britain , and is mainly borrowed from Bede , Henry of Huntingdon , and Symeon of Durham , when Geoffrey of Monmouth is not laid under contribution .
Alfred quotes occasionally from Suetonius , Orosius , and Nennius , and names many Roman authors whom he had consulted in vain for references to Britain .
The chronicle is of no real use to the historical student , since it adds no new fact to the information to be found in well-known earlier authorities .
According to Sidney Lee ( 1885 ) the best manuscript of Alfred 's " Annales " was among the Hengwrt MSS.
belonging to W. W. E. Wynne , Esq. , of Peniarth , Merionethshire , and had not been printed .
Hearne printed the ‘Annales ’ in 1716 from an inferior Bodleian MS. ( Rawl .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Amyntas I ( Greek : Ἀμύντας Aʹ ; c. 540 – 498 BC ) was a king of Macedon .
He was a son of Alcetas I of Macedon .
He married Eurydice and they had a son Alexander .
Amyntas was a tributary vassal of Darius I , king of the Persian Achaemenid Empire .
The history of Macedon may be said to begin with Amyntas ' reign .
He was the first of its rulers to have diplomatic relations with other states .
In particular , he entered into an alliance with Hippias of Athens , and when Hippias was driven out of Athens he offered him the territory of Anthemus on the Thermaic Gulf with the object of taking advantage of the feuds between the Greeks .
Hippias refused the offer and also rejected the offer of Iolcos , as Amyntas probably did not control Anthemous at that time , but was merely suggesting a plan of joint occupation to Hippias .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Anastasius II or Anastasios II could refer to :
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Andronicus or Andronikos is a classical Greek name ( Ανδρόνικος ) , from the Gr .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Arthritis ( from Greek "arthro-" , joint + "-itis" , inflammation ; plural : arthritides ) is a form of joint disorder that involves inflammation of one or more joints .
There are over 100 different forms of arthritis .
The most common form , osteoarthritis ( degenerative joint disease ) , is a result of trauma to the joint , infection of the joint , or age .
Other arthritis forms are rheumatoid arthritis , psoriatic arthritis , and related autoimmune diseases .
The major complaint by individuals who have arthritis is joint pain .
Pain is often a constant and may be localized to the joint affected .
The pain from arthritis is due to inflammation that occurs around the joint , damage to the joint from disease , daily wear and tear of joint , muscle strains caused by forceful movements against stiff painful joints and fatigue .
There are several diseases where joint pain is primary , and is considered the main feature .
Generally when a person has "arthritis " it means that they have one of these diseases , which include :
Joint pain can also be a symptom of other diseases .
In this case , the arthritis is considered to be secondary to the main disease ; these include :
An "undifferentiated arthritis " is an arthritis that does not fit into well-known clinical disease categories , possibly being an early stage of a definite rheumatic disease .
Regardless of the type of arthritis , the common symptoms for all arthritis disorders include varied levels of pain , swelling , joint stiffness and sometimes a constant ache around the joint( s ) .
Arthritic disorders like lupus and rheumatoid can also affect other organs in the body with a variety of symptoms .
It is common in advanced arthritis for significant secondary changes to occur .
For example , in someone who has limited their physical activity :
These changes can also impact on life and social roles , such as community involvement .
Arthritis is the most common cause of disability in the USA .
More than 20 million individuals with arthritis have severe limitations in function on a daily basis .
Absenteeism and frequent visits to the physician are common in individuals who have arthritis .
Arthritis makes it very difficult for individuals to be physically active and some become home bound .
It is estimated that the total cost of arthritis cases is close to $ 100 billion of which nearly 50 % is from lost earnings .
Each year , arthritis results in nearly 1 million hospitalizations and close to 45 million outpatient visits to health care centers .
Arthritis can make it very difficult for an individual to remain physically active , contributing to an increased risk of obesity , high cholesterol or vulnerability to heart disease .
Individuals with arthritis are also at increased risk of depression , which may be related to fear of worsening symptoms .
Diagnosis is made by clinical examination from an appropriate health professional , and may be supported by other tests such as radiology and blood tests , depending on the type of suspected arthritis .
Pain patterns may differ depending on the arthritides and the location .
Rheumatoid arthritis is generally worse in the morning and associated with stiffness ; in the early stages , patients often have no symptoms after a morning shower .
Osteoarthritis , on the other hand , tends to be worse after exercise .
In the aged and children , pain might not be the main presenting feature ; the aged patient simply moves less , the infantile patient refuses to use the affected limb .
Elements of the history of the disorder guide diagnosis .
Important features are speed and time of onset , pattern of joint involvement , symmetry of symptoms , early morning stiffness , tenderness , gelling or locking with inactivity , aggravating and relieving factors , and other systemic symptoms .
Physical examination may confirm the diagnosis , or may indicate systemic disease .
Radiographs are often used to follow progression or help assess severity .
Osteoarthritis is the most common form of arthritis .
It can affect both the larger and the smaller joints of the body , including the hands , wrists , feet , back , hip , and knee .
The disease is essentially one acquired from daily wear and tear of the joint ; however , osteoarthritis can also occur as a result of injury .
Osteoarthritis begins in the cartilage and eventually causes the two opposing bones to erode into each other .
Initially , the condition starts with minor pain during activities , but soon the pain can be continuous and even occur while in a state of rest .
The pain can be debilitating and prevent one from doing some activities .
Osteoarthritis typically affects the weight-bearing joints , such as the back , spine , and pelvis .
Unlike rheumatoid arthritis , osteoarthritis is most commonly a disease of the elderly .
More than 30 percent of women have some degree of osteoarthritis by age 65 .
Risk factors for osteoarthritis include prior joint trauma , obesity , and a sedentary lifestyle .
Osteoarthritis , like rheumatoid arthritis , cannot be cured , but one can prevent the condition from worsening .
Physical therapy to strengthen muscles and joints is very helpful .
Pain medications are widely required by individuals with osteoarthritis .
For some patients , weight loss can reduce the stress on the joints .
When the disease is far advanced and the pain is continuous , surgery may be an option .
Unlike rheumatoid arthritis , joint replacement does help many individuals with osteoarthritis .
Rheumatoid arthritis is a disorder in which the body 's own immune system starts to attack body tissues .
The attack is not only directed at the joint but to many other parts of the body .
In rheumatoid arthritis , most damage occurs to the joint lining and cartilage which eventually results in erosion of two opposing bones .
Rheumatoid arthritis often affects joints in the fingers , wrists , knees and elbows .
The disease is symmetrical ( appears on both sides of the body ) and can lead to severe deformity in a few years if not treated .
Rheumatoid arthritis occurs mostly in people aged 20 and above .
In children , the disorder can present with a skin rash , fever , pain , disability , and limitations in daily activities .
Often , it is not clear why the rheumatoid arthritis occurred .
With earlier diagnosis and aggressive treatment , many individuals can lead a decent quality of life .
The drugs to treat rheumatoid arthritis range from corticosteroids to monoclonal antibodies given intravenously .
The latest drugs like Remicade can significantly improve quality of life in the short term .
In rare cases , surgery may be required to replace joints but there is no cure for the illness .
This adaptive immune response is initiated in part by CD4+ T helper ( Th ) cells , specifically Th17 cells .
Th17 cells are present in higher quantities at the site of bone destruction in joints and produce inflammatory cytokines associated with inflammation , such as interleukin-17 ( IL-17 ) .
Bone erosion is a central feature of rheumatoid arthritis .
Bone continuously undergoes remodeling by actions of bone resorbing osteoclasts and bone forming osteoblasts .
One of the main triggers of bone erosion in the joints in rheumatoid arthritis is inflammation of the synovium , caused in part by the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B ligand (RANKL) , a cell surface protein present in Th17 cells and osteoblasts .
Osteoclast activity can be directly induced by osteoblasts through the RANK/RANKL mechanism .
Lupus is a common collagen vascular disorder that can be present with severe arthritis .
Other features of lupus include a skin rash , extreme photosensitivity , hair loss , kidney problems , lung fibrosis and constant joint pain .
Gout is caused by deposition of uric acid crystals in the joint , causing inflammation .
There is also an uncommon form of gouty arthritis caused by the formation of rhomboid crystals of calcium pyrophosphate known as pseudogout .
In the early stages , the gouty arthritis usually occurs in one joint , but with time , it can occur in many joints and be quite crippling .
The joints in gout can often become swollen and lose function .
Gouty arthritis can become particularly painful and potentially debilitating when gout cannot successfully be treated .
When uric acid levels and gout symptoms cannot be controlled with standard gout medicines that decrease the production of uric acid ( e .g. , allopurinol , febuxostat ) or increase uric acid elimination from the body through the kidneys ( e .g. , probenecid ) , this can be referred to as refractory chronic gout or RCG.
Infectious arthritis is another severe form of arthritis .
It presents with sudden onset of chills , fever and joint pain .
The condition is caused by bacteria elsewhere in the body .
Infectious arthritis must be rapidly diagnosed and treated promptly to prevent irreversible joint damage .
With psoriatic arthritis , most individuals develop the skin problem first and then the arthritis .
The typical features are of continuous joint pains , stiffness and swelling .
The disease does recur with periods of remission but there is no cure for the disorder .
A small percentage develop a severe painful and destructive form of arthritis which destroys the small joints in the hands and can lead to permanent disability and loss of hand function .
There is no cure for either rheumatoid or osteoarthritis .
Treatment options vary depending on the type of arthritis and include physical therapy , lifestyle changes ( including exercise and weight control ) , orthopedic bracing , medications .
Joint replacement surgery may be required in eroding forms of arthritis .
Medications can help reduce inflammation in the joint which decreases pain .
Moreover , by decreasing inflammation , the joint damage may be slowed .
In general , studies have shown that physical exercise of the affected joint can have noticeable improvement in terms of long-term pain relief .
Furthermore , exercise of the arthritic joint is encouraged to maintain the health of the particular joint and the overall body of the person .
Individuals with arthritis can benefit from both physical and occupational therapy .
In arthritis the joints become stiff and the range of movement can be limited .
Physical therapy has been shown to significantly improve function , decrease pain , and delay need for surgical intervention in advanced cases .
Exercise prescribed by a physical therapist has been shown to be more effective than medications in treating osteoarthritis of the knee .
Exercise often focuses on improving muscle strength , endurance and flexibility .
In some cases , exercises may be designed to train balance .
Occupational therapy can provide assistance with activities as well as equipment .
There are several types of medications that are used for the treatment of arthritis .
Treatment typically begins with medications that have the fewest side effects with further medications being added if insufficiently effective .
Treatment also depends on the type of the arthritis .
For example , the first-line treatment for osteoarthritis is acetaminophen ( paracetamol ) while for inflammatory arthritis it involves non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs like ibuprofen .
Arthritis is predominantly a disease of the elderly , but children can also be affected by the disease .
More than 70 % of individuals in North America affected by arthritis are over the age of 65 .
Arthritis is more common in women than men at all ages and affects all races , ethnic groups and cultures .
In the United States a CDC survey based on data from 2007–2009 showed 22.2 % ( 49.9 million ) of adults aged ≥18 years had self-reported doctor-diagnosed arthritis , and 9.4 % ( 21.1 million or 42.4 % of those with arthritis ) had arthritis-attributable activity limitation ( AAAL ) .
With an aging population this number is expected to increase .based
While evidence of primary ankle (kaki ) osteoarthritis has been discovered in dinosaurs , the first known traces of human arthritis date back as far as 4500 BC .
In early reports , arthritis was frequently referred to as the most common ailment of prehistoric peoples .
It was noted in skeletal remains of Native Americans found in Tennessee and parts of what is now Olathe , Kansas .
Evidence of arthritis has been found throughout history , from Ötzi , a mummy ( circa 3000 BC ) found along the border of modern Italy and Austria , to the Egyptian mummies circa 2590 BC
In 1715 William Musgrave published the second edition of his most important medical work " De arthritide symptomatica " which concerned arthritis and its effects .
Blood tests and X-rays of the affected joints often are performed to make the diagnosis .
Screening blood tests are indicated if certain arthritides are suspected .
These might include : rheumatoid factor , antinuclear factor ( ANF) , extractable nuclear antigen , and specific antibodies .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Arabic numerals or Hindu-Arabic numerals or Indo-Arabic numerals are the ten digits : 0, 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 .
They are the most common symbolic representation of numbers in the world today .
The first positional numerical system developed in Babylon in the 2nd millennium BC .
While it used a zero-like placeholder , the first true zero was developed by ancient mathematicians in the Indian Subcontinent .
Arabic numerals are used to represent this Hindu-Arabic numeral system , in which a sequence of digits such as "975 " is read as a single number .
This system is traditionally thought to have been adopted by the Muslim Persian and Arab mathematicians in India , and passed on to the Arabs further west .
There is some evidence which suggests that the numerals in their current form developed from Arabic letters in the western regions of the Arab World .
The current form of the numerals developed in North Africa , distinct in form from the Indian and eastern Arabic numerals .
It was in the North African city of Bejaia that the Italian scholar Fibonacci first encountered the numerals ; his work was crucial in making them known throughout Europe , and then further to the Europeans who spread it worldwide .
The use of Arabic numerals spread around the world through European trade , books and colonialism .
In English , the term " Arabic numerals " can be ambiguous .
It most commonly refers to the numeral system widely used in Europe and the Americas .
" Arabic numerals " is the conventional name for the entire family of related systems of Arabic and Indian numerals .
It may also be intended to mean the numerals used by Arabs , in which case it generally refers to the Eastern Arabic numerals .
Although the phrase " Arabic numeral " is frequently capitalized , it is sometimes written in lower case : for instance , in its entry in the Oxford English dictionary .
This helps distinguish it from " " Arabic numerals " " as the East Arabic numerals specific to the Arabs .
By the middle of the 2nd millennium BC , the Babylonian mathematics had a sophisticated sexagesimal positional numeral system .
The lack of a positional value ( or zero ) was indicated by a " space " between sexagesimal numerals .
By 300 BC , a punctuation symbol ( two slanted wedges ) was co-opted as a placeholder in the same Babylonian system .
In a tablet unearthed at Kish ( dating from about 700 BC ) , the scribe Bêl-bân-aplu wrote his zeros with three hooks , rather than two slanted wedges .
The Babylonian placeholder was not a true zero because it was not used alone .
Nor was it used at the end of a number .
Thus numbers like 2 and 120 ( 2×60 ) , 3 and 180 ( 3×60 ) , 4 and 240 ( 4×60 ) looked the same because the larger numbers lacked a final sexagesimal placeholder .
The decimal Hindu-Arabic numeral system was invented in India around 500 CE.
The system was revolutionary by including a zero and positional notation .
It is considered an important milestone in the development of mathematics .
One may distinguish between this positional " system" , which is identical throughout the family , and the precise glyphs used to write the numerals , which vary regionally .
The glyphs most commonly used in conjunction with the Latin script since early modern times are 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 .
The first universally accepted inscription containing the use of the 0 glyph is first recorded in the 9th century , in an inscription at Gwalior in Central India dated to 870 .
By this time , the use of the glyph had already reached Persia , and was mentioned in Al-Khwarizmi 's descriptions of Indian numerals .
Numerous Indian documents on copper plates exist , with the same symbol for zero in them , dated back as far as the 6th century CE.
The numeral system came to be known to both the Persian mathematician Al-Khwarizmi , whose book " On the Calculation with Hindu Numerals " written about 825 in Arabic , and the Arab mathematician Al-Kindi , who wrote four volumes , " On the Use of the Indian Numerals " ( " Ketab fi Isti 'mal al-'Adad al-Hindi" ) about 830 .
Their work was principally responsible for the diffusion of the Indian system of numeration in the Middle East and the West .
In the 10th century , Middle-Eastern mathematicians extended the decimal numeral system to include fractions , as recorded in a treatise by Syrian mathematician Abu'l-Hasan al-Uqlidisi in 952–953 .
The decimal point notation was introduced by Sind ibn Ali , he also wrote the earliest treatise on Arabic numerals .
A distinctive West Arabic variant of the symbols begins to emerge around the 10th century in the Maghreb and Al-Andalus , called "ghubar " ( " sand-table " or "dust-table " ) numerals , which are the direct ancestor of the modern Western Arabic numerals used throughout the world .
Ghubar numerals themselves are probably of Roman origin .
Some folk etymologies have argued that the original forms of these symbols indicated their value through the number of angles they contained , but no evidence exists of any such origin .
In 825 Al-Khwārizmī wrote a treatise in Arabic , " On the Calculation with Hindu Numerals " , which survives only as the 12th-century Latin translation , " Algoritmi de numero Indorum" .
" Algoritmi" , the translator 's rendition of the author 's name , gave rise to the word "algorithm " ( Latin "algorithmus" , " calculation method " ) .
The first mentions of the numerals in the West are found in the " Codex Vigilanus " of 976 .
From the 980s , Gerbert of Aurillac ( later , Pope Sylvester II ) used his position to spread knowledge of the numerals in Europe .
He was known to have requested mathematical treatises concerning the astrolabe from Lupitus of Barcelona after he had returned to France .
Leonardo Fibonacci ( Leonardo of Pisa ) , a mathematician born in the Republic of Pisa who had studied in Béjaïa ( Bougie ) , Algeria , promoted the Indian numeral system in Europe with his 1202 book " Liber Abaci" :
The numerals are arranged with their lowest value digit to the right , with higher value positions added to the left .
This arrangement was adopted identically into the numerals as used in Europe .
Languages written in the Latin alphabet run from left-to-right , unlike languages written in the Arabic alphabet .
Hence , from the point of view of the reader , numerals in Western texts are written with the highest power of the base first whereas numerals in Arabic texts are written with the lowest power of the base first .
The reason the digits are more commonly known as " Arabic numerals " in Europe and the Americas is that they were introduced to Europe in the 10th century by Arabic-speakers of North Africa , who were then using the digits from Libya to Morocco .
Arabs , on the other hand , call the system " Hindu numerals " , referring to their origin in India .
This is not to be confused with what the Arabs call the " Hindi numerals " , namely the Eastern Arabic numerals ( - - - - - - - - - ) used in the Middle East , or any of the numerals currently used in Indian languages ( e .g .
The European acceptance of the numerals was accelerated by the invention of the printing press , and they became widely known during the 15th century .
Early evidence of their use in Britain includes : an equal hour horary quadrant from 1396 , in England , a 1445 inscription on the tower of Heathfield Church , Sussex ; a 1448 inscription on a wooden lych-gate of Bray Church , Berkshire ; and a 1487 inscription on the belfry door at Piddletrenthide church , Dorset ; and in Scotland a 1470 inscription on the tomb of the first Earl of Huntly in Elgin Cathedral .
( See G.F. Hill , " The Development of Arabic Numerals in Europe " for more examples . )
In central Europe , the King of Hungary Ladislaus the Posthumous , started the use of Arabic numerals , which appear for the first time in a royal document of 1456 .
By the mid-16th century , they were in common use in most of Europe .
Roman numerals remained in use mostly for the notation of Anno Domini years , and for numbers on clockfaces .
Sometimes , Roman numerals are still used for enumeration of lists ( as an alternative to alphabetical enumeration ) , for sequential volumes , to differentiate monarchs or family members with the same first names , and ( in lower case ) to number pages in prefatory material in books .
Cyrillic numerals were a numbering system derived from the Cyrillic alphabet , used by South and East Slavic peoples .
The system was used in Russia as late as the early 18th century when Peter the Great replaced it with Arabic numerals .
Arabic numerals were introduced to China during the Yuan Dynasty ( 1271–1368 ) by the Muslim Hui people .
In the early 17th century , European-style Arabic numerals were introduced by the Jesuits .
The numeral system employed , known as algorism , is positional decimal notation .
Various symbol sets are used to represent numbers in the Hindu-Arabic numeral system , which may have evolved from the Brahmi numerals , or developed independently from it .
The symbols used to represent the system have split into various typographical variants since the Middle Ages :
The evolution of the numerals in early Europe is shown on a table created by the French scholar J.E. Montucla in his " Histoire de la Mathematique" , which was published in 1757 :
The Arabic numeral glyphs 0-9 are encoded in ASCII and UTF-8 at positions 0x30 to 0x39 , matching up with the second hex-digit for convenience :
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Archimedes of Syracuse ( ; BC – BC ) was an ancient Greek mathematician , physicist , engineer , inventor , and astronomer .
Although few details of his life are known , he is regarded as one of the leading scientists in classical antiquity .
Among his advances in physics are the foundations of hydrostatics , statics and an explanation of the principle of the lever .
He is credited with designing innovative machines , including siege engines and the screw pump that bears his name .
Modern experiments have tested claims that Archimedes designed machines capable of lifting attacking ships out of the water and setting ships on fire using an array of mirrors .
Archimedes is generally considered to be the greatest mathematician of antiquity and one of the greatest of all time .
He used the method of exhaustion to calculate the area under the arc of a parabola with the summation of an infinite series , and gave a remarkably accurate approximation of pi .
He also defined the spiral bearing his name , formulae for the volumes of solids of revolution , and an ingenious system for expressing very large numbers .
Archimedes died during the Siege of Syracuse when he was killed by a Roman soldier despite orders that he should not be harmed .
Cicero describes visiting the tomb of Archimedes , which was surmounted by a sphere inscribed within a cylinder .
Archimedes had proven that the sphere has two thirds of the volume and surface area of the cylinder ( including the bases of the latter ) , and regarded this as the greatest of his mathematical achievements .
Unlike his inventions , the mathematical writings of Archimedes were little known in antiquity .
Mathematicians from Alexandria read and quoted him , but the first comprehensive compilation was not made until " c . " 530 AD by Isidore of Miletus , while commentaries on the works of Archimedes written by Eutocius in the sixth century AD opened them to wider readership for the first time .
The relatively few copies of Archimedes ' written work that survived through the Middle Ages were an influential source of ideas for scientists during the Renaissance , while the discovery in 1906 of previously unknown works by Archimedes in the Archimedes Palimpsest has provided new insights into how he obtained mathematical results .
287 BC in the seaport city of Syracuse , Sicily , at that time a self-governing colony in Magna Graecia , located along the coast of Southern Italy .
The date of birth is based on a statement by the Byzantine Greek historian John Tzetzes that Archimedes lived for 75 years .
In " The Sand Reckoner" , Archimedes gives his father 's name as Phidias , an astronomer about whom nothing is known .
Plutarch wrote in his " Parallel Lives " that Archimedes was related to King Hiero II , the ruler of Syracuse .
A biography of Archimedes was written by his friend Heracleides but this work has been lost , leaving the details of his life obscure .
It is unknown , for instance , whether he ever married or had children .
During his youth , Archimedes may have studied in Alexandria , Egypt , where Conon of Samos and Eratosthenes of Cyrene were contemporaries .
He referred to Conon of Samos as his friend , while two of his works ( " The Method of Mechanical Theorems " and the " Cattle Problem" ) have introductions addressed to Eratosthenes .
212 BC during the Second Punic War , when Roman forces under General Marcus Claudius Marcellus captured the city of Syracuse after a two-year-long siege .
According to the popular account given by Plutarch , Archimedes was contemplating a mathematical diagram when the city was captured .
A Roman soldier commanded him to come and meet General Marcellus but he declined , saying that he had to finish working on the problem .
The soldier was enraged by this , and killed Archimedes with his sword .
Plutarch also gives a account of the death of Archimedes which suggests that he may have been killed while attempting to surrender to a Roman soldier .
According to this story , Archimedes was carrying mathematical instruments , and was killed because the soldier thought that they were valuable items .
General Marcellus was reportedly angered by the death of Archimedes , as he considered him a valuable scientific asset and had ordered that he not be harmed .
The last words attributed to Archimedes are " Do not disturb my circles " , a reference to the circles in the mathematical drawing that he was supposedly studying when disturbed by the Roman soldier .
This quote is often given in Latin as " " Noli turbare circulos meos" , " but there is no reliable evidence that Archimedes uttered these words and they do not appear in the account given by Plutarch .
Valerius Maximus , writing in " Memorable Doings and Sayings " in the 1st century AD , gives the phrase as " " ...sed protecto manibus puluere 'noli' inquit , 'obsecro , istum disturbare " - " ... but protecting the dust with his hands , said ' I beg of you , do not disturb this .
The phrase is also given in Katharevousa Greek as " μὴ μου τοὺς κύκλους τάραττε ! " ( ) .
The tomb of Archimedes carried a sculpture illustrating his favorite mathematical proof , consisting of a sphere and a cylinder of the same height and diameter .
Archimedes had proven that the volume and surface area of the sphere are two thirds that of the cylinder including its bases .
In 75 BC , 137 years after his death , the Roman orator Cicero was serving as quaestor in Sicily .
He had heard stories about the tomb of Archimedes , but none of the locals was able to give him the location .
Eventually he found the tomb near the Agrigentine gate in Syracuse , in a neglected condition and overgrown with bushes .
Cicero had the tomb cleaned up , and was able to see the carving and read some of the verses that had been added as an inscription .
A tomb discovered in a hotel courtyard in Syracuse in the early 1960s was claimed to be that of Archimedes , but its location today is unknown .
The standard versions of the life of Archimedes were written long after his death by the historians of Ancient Rome .
The account of the siege of Syracuse given by Polybius in his " Universal History " was written around seventy years after Archimedes ' death , and was used subsequently as a source by Plutarch and Livy .
It sheds little light on Archimedes as a person , and focuses on the war machines that he is said to have built in order to defend the city .
The most widely known anecdote about Archimedes tells of how he invented a method for determining the volume of an object with an irregular shape .
According to Vitruvius , a votive crown for a temple had been made for King Hiero II , who had supplied the pure gold to be used , and Archimedes was asked to determine whether some silver had been substituted by the dishonest goldsmith .
Archimedes had to solve the problem without damaging the crown , so he could not melt it down into a regularly shaped body in order to calculate its density .
While taking a bath , he noticed that the level of the water in the tub rose as he got in , and realized that this effect could be used to determine the volume of the crown .
For practical purposes water is incompressible , so the submerged crown would displace an amount of water equal to its own volume .
By dividing the mass of the crown by the volume of water displaced , the density of the crown could be obtained .
This density would be lower than that of gold if cheaper and less dense metals had been added .
Archimedes then took to the streets naked , so excited by his discovery that he had forgotten to dress , crying " Eureka ! " ( ! , " meaning " I have found it ! " ) .
The test was conducted successfully , proving that silver had indeed been mixed in .
The story of the golden crown does not appear in the known works of Archimedes .
Moreover , the practicality of the method it describes has been called into question , due to the extreme accuracy with which one would have to measure the water displacement .
Archimedes may have instead sought a solution that applied the principle known in hydrostatics as Archimedes ' principle , which he describes in his treatise " On Floating Bodies " .
This principle states that a body immersed in a fluid experiences a buoyant force equal to the weight of the fluid it displaces .
Using this principle , it would have been possible to compare the density of the golden crown to that of solid gold by balancing the crown on a scale with a gold reference sample , then immersing the apparatus in water .
The difference in density between the two samples would cause the scale to tip accordingly .
Galileo considered it "probable that this method is the same that Archimedes followed , since , besides being very accurate , it is based on demonstrations found by Archimedes himself . "
In a 12th-century text titled " Mappae clavicula " there are instructions on how to perform the weighings in the water in order to calculate the percentage of silver used , and thus solve the problem .
The Latin poem " Carmen de ponderibus et mensuris " of the 4th or 5th century describes the use of a hydrostatic balance to solve the problem of the crown , and attributes the method to Archimedes .
A large part of Archimedes ' work in engineering arose from fulfilling the needs of his home city of Syracuse .
The Greek writer Athenaeus of Naucratis described how King Hiero II commissioned Archimedes to design a huge ship , the " Syracusia" , which could be used for luxury travel , carrying supplies , and as a naval warship .
The " Syracusia " is said to have been the largest ship built in classical antiquity .
According to Athenaeus , it was capable of carrying 600 people and included garden decorations , a gymnasium and a temple dedicated to the goddess Aphrodite among its facilities .
Since a ship of this size would leak a considerable amount of water through the hull , the Archimedes ' screw was purportedly developed in order to remove the bilge water .
Archimedes ' machine was a device with a revolving screw-shaped blade inside a cylinder .
It was turned by hand , and could also be used to transfer water from a body of water into irrigation canals .
The Archimedes ' screw is still in use today for pumping liquids and granulated solids such as coal and grain .
The Archimedes ' screw described in Roman times by Vitruvius may have been an improvement on a screw pump that was used to irrigate the Hanging Gardens of Babylon .
The world 's first seagoing steamship with a screw propeller was the " SS Archimedes " , which was launched in 1839 and named in honor of Archimedes and his work on the screw .
The Claw of Archimedes is a weapon that he is said to have designed in order to defend the city of Syracuse .
Also known as " the ship shaker , " the claw consisted of a crane-like arm from which a large metal grappling hook was suspended .
When the claw was dropped onto an attacking ship the arm would swing upwards , lifting the ship out of the water and possibly sinking it .
There have been modern experiments to test the feasibility of the claw , and in 2005 a television documentary entitled " Superweapons of the Ancient World " built a version of the claw and concluded that it was a workable device .
The 2nd century AD author Lucian wrote that during the Siege of Syracuse ( "c . " 214–212 BC ) , Archimedes destroyed enemy ships with fire .
Centuries later , Anthemius of Tralles mentions burning-glasses as Archimedes ' weapon .
The device , sometimes called the " Archimedes heat ray" , was used to focus sunlight onto approaching ships , causing them to catch fire .
This purported weapon has been the subject of ongoing debate about its credibility since the Renaissance .
René Descartes rejected it as false , while modern researchers have attempted to recreate the effect using only the means that would have been available to Archimedes .
It has been suggested that a large array of highly polished bronze or copper shields acting as mirrors could have been employed to focus sunlight onto a ship .
This would have used the principle of the parabolic reflector in a manner similar to a solar furnace .
A test of the Archimedes heat ray was carried out in 1973 by the Greek scientist Ioannis Sakkas .
The experiment took place at the Skaramagas naval base outside Athens .
On this occasion 70 mirrors were used , each with a copper coating and a size of around five by three feet ( 1.5 by 1 m ) .
The mirrors were pointed at a plywood of a Roman warship at a distance of around 160 feet ( 50 m ) .
When the mirrors were focused accurately , the ship burst into flames within a few seconds .
The plywood ship had a coating of tar paint , which may have aided combustion .
A coating of tar would have been commonplace on ships in the classical era .
In October 2005 a group of students from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology carried out an experiment with 127 one-foot ( 30 cm ) square mirror tiles , focused on a wooden ship at a range of around 100 feet ( 30 m ) .
Flames broke out on a patch of the ship , but only after the sky had been cloudless and the ship had remained stationary for around ten minutes .
It was concluded that the device was a feasible weapon under these conditions .
The MIT group repeated the experiment for the television show " MythBusters " , using a wooden fishing boat in San Francisco as the target .
Again some charring occurred , along with a small amount of flame .
In order to catch fire , wood needs to reach its autoignition temperature , which is around 300 °C ( 570 °F ) .
When " MythBusters " broadcast the result of the San Francisco experiment in January 2006 , the claim was placed in the category of "busted " ( or failed ) because of the length of time and the ideal weather conditions required for combustion to occur .
It was also pointed out that since Syracuse faces the sea towards the east , the Roman fleet would have had to attack during the morning for optimal gathering of light by the mirrors .
" MythBusters " also pointed out that conventional weaponry , such as flaming arrows or bolts from a catapult , would have been a far easier way of setting a ship on fire at short distances .
In December 2010 , " MythBusters " again looked at the heat ray story in a special edition featuring Barack Obama , entitled " President 's Challenge " .
Several experiments were carried out , including a large scale test with 500 schoolchildren aiming mirrors at a of a Roman sailing ship 400 feet ( 120 m ) away .
In all of the experiments , the sail failed to reach the 210 °C ( 410 °F ) required to catch fire , and the verdict was again "busted " .
The show concluded that a more likely effect of the mirrors would have been blinding , dazzling , or distracting the crew of the ship .
While Archimedes did not invent the lever , he gave an explanation of the principle involved in his work " On the Equilibrium of Planes " .
Earlier descriptions of the lever are found in the Peripatetic school of the followers of Aristotle , and are sometimes attributed to Archytas .
According to Pappus of Alexandria , Archimedes ' work on levers caused him to remark : " Give me a place to stand on , and I will move the Earth . "
( ) Plutarch describes how Archimedes designed block-and-tackle pulley systems , allowing sailors to use the principle of leverage to lift objects that would otherwise have been too heavy to move .
Archimedes has also been credited with improving the power and accuracy of the catapult , and with inventing the odometer during the First Punic War .
The odometer was described as a cart with a gear mechanism that dropped a ball into a container after each mile traveled .
Cicero ( 106–43 BC ) mentions Archimedes briefly in his dialogue " De re publica" , which portrays a fictional conversation taking place in 129 BC .
After the capture of Syracuse " c . " 212 BC , General Marcus Claudius Marcellus is said to have taken back to Rome two mechanisms , constructed by Archimedes and used as aids in astronomy , which showed the motion of the Sun , Moon and five planets .
Cicero mentions similar mechanisms designed by Thales of Miletus and Eudoxus of Cnidus .
The dialogue says that Marcellus kept one of the devices as his only personal loot from Syracuse , and donated the other to the Temple of Virtue in Rome .
Marcellus ' mechanism was demonstrated , according to Cicero , by Gaius Sulpicius Gallus to Lucius Furius Philus , who described it thus :
This is a description of a planetarium or orrery .
Pappus of Alexandria stated that Archimedes had written a manuscript ( now lost ) on the construction of these mechanisms entitled .
Modern research in this area has been focused on the Antikythera mechanism , another device built BC that was probably designed for the same purpose .
Constructing mechanisms of this kind would have required a sophisticated knowledge of differential gearing .
This was once thought to have been beyond the range of the technology available in ancient times , but the discovery of the Antikythera mechanism in 1902 has confirmed that devices of this kind were known to the ancient Greeks .
While he is often regarded as a designer of mechanical devices , Archimedes also made contributions to the field of mathematics .
Plutarch wrote : " He placed his whole affection and ambition in those purer speculations where there can be no reference to the vulgar needs of life . "
In " Measurement of a Circle" , Archimedes gives the value of the square root of 3 as lying between ( approximately 1.7320261 ) and ( approximately 1.7320512 ) .
The actual value is approximately 1.7320508 , making this a very accurate estimate .
He introduced this result without offering any explanation of how he had obtained it .
This aspect of the work of Archimedes caused John Wallis to remark that he was : " as it were of set purpose to have covered up the traces of his investigation as if he had grudged posterity the secret of his method of inquiry while he wished to extort from them assent to his results . "
It is possible that he used an iterative procedure to calculate these values .
In " The Quadrature of the Parabola" , Archimedes proved that the area enclosed by a parabola and a straight line is times the area of a corresponding inscribed triangle as shown in the figure at right .
He expressed the solution to the problem as an infinite geometric series with the common ratio :
If the first term in this series is the area of the triangle , then the second is the sum of the areas of two triangles whose bases are the two smaller secant lines , and so on .
This proof uses a variation of the series which sums to .
In " The Sand Reckoner" , Archimedes set out to calculate the number of grains of sand that the universe could contain .
In doing so , he challenged the notion that the number of grains of sand was too large to be counted .
He wrote : " There are some , King Gelo ( Gelo II , son of Hiero II ) , who think that the number of the sand is infinite in multitude ; and I mean by the sand not only that which exists about Syracuse and the rest of Sicily but also that which is found in every region whether inhabited or uninhabited . "
To solve the problem , Archimedes devised a system of counting based on the myriad .
The word is from the Greek "murias" , for the number 10,000 .
He proposed a number system using powers of a myriad of myriads ( 100 million ) and concluded that the number of grains of sand required to fill the universe would be 8 vigintillion , or 8.
The works of Archimedes were written in Doric Greek , the dialect of ancient Syracuse .
The written work of Archimedes has not survived as well as that of Euclid , and seven of his treatises are known to have existed only through references made to them by other authors .
Pappus of Alexandria mentions " On Sphere-Making " and another work on polyhedra , while Theon of Alexandria quotes a remark about refraction from the " Catoptrica" .
During his lifetime , Archimedes made his work known through correspondence with the mathematicians in Alexandria .
The writings of Archimedes were collected by the Byzantine architect Isidore of Miletus ( " c" .
530 AD) , while commentaries on the works of Archimedes written by Eutocius in the sixth century AD helped to bring his work a wider audience .
Archimedes ' work was translated into Arabic by Thābit ibn Qurra (836–901 AD) , and Latin by Gerard of Cremona ( "c . " 1114–1187 AD ) .
During the Renaissance , the "Editio Princeps " ( First Edition ) was published in Basel in 1544 by Johann Herwagen with the works of Archimedes in Greek and Latin .
Around the year 1586 Galileo Galilei invented a hydrostatic balance for weighing metals in air and water after apparently being inspired by the work of Archimedes .
Archimedes ' " Book of Lemmas " or " Liber Assumptorum " is a treatise with fifteen propositions on the nature of circles .
The earliest known copy of the text is in Arabic .
The scholars T. L. Heath and Marshall Clagett argued that it cannot have been written by Archimedes in its current form , since it quotes Archimedes , suggesting modification by another author .
The " Lemmas " may be based on an earlier work by Archimedes that is now lost .
It has also been claimed that Heron 's formula for calculating the area of a triangle from the length of its sides was known to Archimedes .
However , the first reliable reference to the formula is given by Heron of Alexandria in the 1st century AD.
The foremost document containing the work of Archimedes is the Archimedes Palimpsest .
In 1906 , the Danish professor Johan Ludvig Heiberg visited Constantinople and examined a 174-page goatskin parchment of prayers written in the 13th century AD.
He discovered that it was a palimpsest , a document with text that had been written over an erased older work .
Palimpsests were created by scraping the ink from existing works and reusing them , which was a common practice in the Middle Ages as vellum was expensive .
The older works in the palimpsest were identified by scholars as 10th century AD copies of previously unknown treatises by Archimedes .
The parchment spent hundreds of years in a monastery library in Constantinople before being sold to a private collector in the 1920s .
On October 29 , 1998 it was sold at auction to an anonymous buyer for $ 2 million at Christie 's in New York .
The palimpsest holds seven treatises , including the only surviving copy of " On Floating Bodies " in the original Greek .
It is the only known source of " The Method of Mechanical Theorems " , referred to by Suidas and thought to have been lost forever .
" Stomachion " was also discovered in the palimpsest , with a more complete analysis of the puzzle than had been found in previous texts .
The palimpsest is now stored at the Walters Art Museum in Baltimore , Maryland , where it has been subjected to a range of modern tests including the use of ultraviolet and light to read the overwritten text .
The treatises in the Archimedes Palimpsest are : " On the Equilibrium of Planes , On Spirals , Measurement of a Circle , On the Sphere and the Cylinder , On Floating Bodies , The Method of Mechanical Theorems " and " Stomachion " .
In the preface to " On Spirals " addressed to Dositheus of Pelusium , Archimedes says that "many years have elapsed since Conon 's death . "
Conon of Samos lived , suggesting that Archimedes may have been an older man when writing some of his works .
The treatises by Archimedes known to exist only through references in the works of other authors are : " On Sphere-Making " and a work on polyhedra mentioned by Pappus of Alexandria ; " Catoptrica" , a work on optics mentioned by Theon of Alexandria ; " Principles " , addressed to Zeuxippus and explaining the number system used in " The Sand Reckoner " ; " On Balances and Levers " ; " On Centers of Gravity " ; " On the Calendar " .
Of the surviving works by Archimedes , T. L. Heath offers the following suggestion as to the order in which they were written : " On the Equilibrium of Planes I" , " The Quadrature of the Parabola" , " On the Equilibrium of Planes II " , " On the Sphere and the Cylinder I , II " , " On Spirals " , " On Conoids and Spheroids " , " On Floating Bodies I , II " , " On the Measurement of a Circle" , " The Sand Reckoner " .
Boyer , Carl Benjamin " A History of Mathematics " ( 1991 ) ISBN 0-471-54397-7 " Arabic scholars inform us that the familiar area formula for a triangle in terms of its three sides , usually known as Heron 's formula — "k " = √ ( " s " ( " s " − " a" ) ( " s " − " b" ) ( " s " − " c" ) ) , where " s " is the semiperimeter — was known to Archimedes several centuries before Heron lived .
Arabic scholars also attribute to Archimedes the 'theorem on the broken chord ' ... Archimedes is reported by the Arabs to have given several proofs of the theorem . "
" It was usual to smear the seams or even the whole hull with pitch or with pitch and wax" .
In Νεκρικοὶ Διάλογοι ( " Dialogues of the Dead " ) , Lucian refers to coating the seams of a skiff with wax , a reference to pitch ( tar ) or wax .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Alternative medicine is any practice that is put forward as having the healing effects of medicine but is not based on evidence gathered using the scientific method .
It consists of a wide range of health care practices , products and therapies , using alternative medical diagnoses and treatments which typically have not been included in the degree courses of established medical schools or used in conventional medicine .
Examples of alternative medicine include homeopathy , naturopathy , chiropractic , energy medicine and acupuncture .
Complementary medicine is alternative medicine used together with conventional medical treatment in a belief , not proven by using scientific methods , that it " complements " the treatment .
CAM is the abbreviation for Complementary and alternative medicine .
Integrative medicine ( or integrative health ) is the combination of the practices and methods of alternative medicine with conventional medicine .
The term "alternative medicine " is used in information issued by public bodies in the Commonwealth of Australia the United Kingdom and the United States of America .
Regulation and licensing of alternative medicine and health care providers varies from country to country , and state to state .
Numerous skeptics and critics have disputed the term alternative medicine , citing variations of " there is really no such thing as alternative medicine , just medicine that works and medicine that does n't " .
The expression " complementary and alternative medicine " ( CAM ) resists easy definition because the health systems and practices to which it refers are diffuse and its boundaries are poorly defined .
Healthcare practices categorized as alternative may differ in their historical origin , theoretical basis , diagnostic technique , therapeutic practice and in their relationship to the medical mainstream .
Some alternative therapies , including traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) and Ayurveda , have antique origins in East or South Asia and are entirely alternative medical systems ; .</ref>
others , such as homeopathy and chiropractic , have origins in Europe or the United States and emerged in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries .
Some , such as osteopathy and chiropractic , employ manipulative physical methods of treatment ; others , such as meditation and prayer , are based on mind-body interventions .
Treatments considered alternative in one location may be considered conventional in another .
Thus , chiropractic is not considered alternative in Denmark and likewise osteopathic medicine is no longer thought of as an alternative therapy in the United States .
One common feature of all definitions of alternative medicine is its designation as "other than " conventional medicine .
For example , the widely referenced descriptive definition of complementary and alternative medicine devised by the US National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine (NCCAM ) of the National Institutes of Health ( NIH) , states that it is " a group of diverse medical and health care systems , practices , and products that are not generally considered part of conventional medicine . "
This definition has been criticized as , if an alternative therapy , both effective and safe , is adopted by conventional medical practitioners , it does not necessarily follow that either it or its practitioners would no longer be considered alternative .
Some definitions seek to specify alternative medicine in terms of its social and political marginality to mainstream healthcare .
This can refer to the lack of support that alternative therapies receive from the medical establishment and related bodies regarding access to research funding , sympathetic coverage in the medical press , or inclusion in the standard medical curriculum .
In 1993 , the British Medical Association ( BMA ) , one among many professional organizations who have attempted to define alternative medicine , stated that it referred to " those forms of treatment which are not widely used by the conventional healthcare professions , and the skills of which are not taught as part of the undergraduate curriculum of conventional medical and paramedical healthcare courses " .
In a US context , an influential definition coined in 1993 by the Harvard-based physician , David M. Eisenberg , characterized alternative medicine " as interventions neither taught widely in medical schools nor generally available in US hospitals " ..</ref> These descriptive definitions are inadequate in the present-day when some conventional doctors offer alternative medical treatments and CAM introductory courses or modules can be offered as part of standard undergraduate medical training ; alternative medicine is taught in more than 50 per cent of US medical schools and increasingly US health insurers are willing to provide reimbursement for CAM therapies .
In 1999 , 7.7 % of US hospitals reported using some form of CAM therapy ; this proportion had risen to 37.7 % by 2008 .
An expert panel at a conference hosted in 1995 by the US Office for Alternative Medicine ( OAM ) , devised a theoretical definition of alternative medicine as " a broad domain of healing resources ... other than those intrinsic to the politically dominant health system of a particular society or culture in a given historical period . "
This definition has been widely adopted by CAM researchers , cited by official government bodies such as the UK Department of Health , attributed as the definition used by the Cochrane Collaboration , and , with slight modification , was preferred in the 2005 consensus report of the US Institute of Medicine , " Complementary and Alternative Medicine in the United States" .
The 1995 OAM conference definition , an expansion of Eisenberg 's 1993 formulation , is silent regarding questions of the medical effectiveness of alternative therapies .
Its proponents hold that it thus avoids relativism about differing forms of medical knowledge and , while it is an essentially political definition , this should not imply that the dominance of mainstream biomedicine is solely due to political forces .
According to this definition , alternative and mainstream medicine can only be differentiated with reference to what is "intrinsic to the politically dominant health system of a particular society of culture " .
However , there is neither a reliable method to distinguish between cultures and subcultures , nor to attribute them as dominant or subordinate , nor any accepted criteria to determine the dominance of a cultural entity .
If the culture of a politically dominant healthcare system is held to be equivalent to the perspectives of those charged with the medical management of leading healthcare institutions and programs , the definition fails to recognize the potential for division either within such an elite or between a healthcare elite and the wider population .
Normative definitions distinguish alternative medicine from the biomedical mainstream in its provision of therapies that are unproven , unvalidated or ineffective and support of theories which have no recognized scientific basis .
These definitions characterize practices as constituting alternative medicine when , used independently or in place of evidence-based medicine , they are put forward as having the healing effects of medicine , but which are not based on evidence gathered with the scientific method .
Exemplifying this perspective , a 1998 editorial co-authored by Marcia Angell , a former editor of the " New England Journal of Medicine" , argued that :
This definition has been described by Robert L. Park as a logical Catch-22 which ensures that any CAM method which is proven to work "would no longer be CAM , it would simply be medicine . "
Paul Offit , while criticizing alternative medicine , has provided a similar type of definition :
Joseph A. Schwarcz has stated : " There 's a name for alternative medicines that work .
Tim Minchin states : " Alternative medicine  has either not been proved to work , or been proved not to work .
You know what they call alternative medicine  that 's been proved to work ?
" Complementary medicine " refers to use of alternative medicine alongside conventional science based medicine , in the belief that it "may help patients feel better and recover faster . "
In " Science and Technology : Public Attitudes and Public Understanding" , chapter 7 of a report " Science and Engineering Indicators – 2002" , issued by a US government agency ( The National Science Foundation ) , it was stated that the term "alternative medicine " was there being used to refer to all treatments that had not been proven effective using scientific methods .
Public information websites maintained by the governments of the US and of the UK make a distinction between "alternative medicine " and " complementary medicine " , but mention that these two can overlap .
The National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine (NCCAM ) of the National Institutes of Health ( NIH) ( a part of the US Department of Health and Human Services ) states that "alternative medicine " refers to using a non-mainstream approach in place of conventional medicine and that " complementary medicine " generally refers to using a non-mainstream approach together with conventional medicine , and comments that the boundaries between complementary and conventional medicine overlap and change with time .
The National Health Service ( NHS) website " NHS Choices " ( owned by the UK Department of Health ) , adopting the terminology of NCCAM , states that when a treatment is used alongside conventional treatments , to help a patient cope with a health condition , and not as an alternative to conventional treatment , this use of treatments can be called " complementary medicine " ; but when a treatment is used instead of conventional medicine , with the intention of treating or curing a health condition , the use can be called "alternative medicine " .
Similarly , the public information website maintained by the National Health and Medical Research Council ( NHMRC ) of the Commonwealth of Australia uses the acronym "CAM " for a wide range of health care practices , therapies , procedures and devices not within the domain of conventional medicine .
In the Australian context this is stated to include acupuncture ; aromatherapy ; chiropractic ; homeopathy ; massage ; meditation and relaxation therapies ; naturopathy ; osteopathy ; reflexology , traditional Chinese medicine ; and the use of vitamin supplements .
The Danish National Board of Health 's " Council for Alternative Medicine " ( Sundhedsstyrelsens Råd for Alternativ Behandling ( SRAB) ) , an independent institution under the National Board of Health ( Danish : " Sundhedsstyrelsen " ) , uses the term "alternative medicine " for :
In " General Guidelines for Methodologies on Research and Evaluation of Traditional Medicine" , published in 2000 by the World Health Organization ( WHO ) , complementary and alternative medicine were there defined as a broad set of health care practices that are not part of that country 's own tradition and are not integrated into the dominant health care system .
Some herbal therapies are mainstream in Europe but are alternative in the US.
Two advocates of integrative medicine , writing in 2002 of the American healthcare system , claimed that it also addresses alleged problems with medicine based on science , which are not addressed by CAM ; Ralph Snyderman and Andrew Weil stated that "integrative medicine is not synonymous with complementary and alternative medicine .
It has a far larger meaning and mission in that it calls for restoration of the focus of medicine on health and healing and emphasizes the centrality of the patient-physician relationship . "
Dating from the 1970s , medical professionals , sociologists , anthropologists and other commentators noted the increasing visibility of a wide variety of health practices that had neither derived directly from nor been verified by biomedical science .
Since that time , those who have analyzed this trend have deliberated over the most apt language with which to describe this emergent health field .
A variety of terms have been used , including heterodox , irregular , fringe and alternative medicine while others , particularly medical commentators , have been satisfied to label them as instances of quackery .
The most persistent term has been alternative medicine but its use is problematic as it assumes a value-laden dichotomy between a medical fringe , implicitly of borderline acceptability at best , and a privileged medical orthodoxy , associated with validated medico-scientific norms .
The use of the category of alternative medicine has also been criticized as it cannot be studied as an independent entity but must be understood in terms of a regionally and temporally specific medical orthodoxy .
Its use can also be misleading as it may erroneously imply that a real medical alternative exists .
As with near-synonymous expressions , such as unorthodox , complementary , marginal , or quackery , these linguistic devices have served , in the context of processes of professionalisation and market competition , to establish the authority of official medicine and police the boundary between it and its unconventional rivals .
From a historical perspective , the emergence of alternative medicine , if not the term itself , is typically dated to the 19th century .
This is despite the fact that there are variants of Western non-conventional medicine that arose in the late-eighteenth century or earlier and some non-Western medical traditions , currently considered alternative in the West and elsewhere , which boast extended historical pedigrees .
Alternative medical systems , however , can only be said to exist when there is an identifiable , regularized and authoritative standard medical practice , such as arose in the West during the nineteenth-century , to which they can function as an alternative .
During the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries regular and irregular medical practitioners became more clearly differentiated throughout much of Europe and , as the nineteenth century progressed , most Western states converged in the creation of legally delimited and semi-protected medical markets .
It is at this point that an "official " medicine , created in cooperation with the state and employing a scientific rhetoric of legitimacy , emerges as a recognizable entity and that the concept of alternative medicine as a historical category becomes tenable .
As part of this process , professional adherents of mainstream medicine in countries such as Germany , France , and Britain increasingly invoked the scientific basis of their discipline as a means of engendering internal professional unity and of external differentiation in the face of sustained market competition from homeopaths , naturopaths , mesmerists and other nonconventional medical practitioners , finally achieving a degree of imperfect dominance through alliance with the state and the passage of regulatory legislation .
In the US the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine , based in Baltimore , Maryland , opened in 1893 and was the first medical school devoted to teaching " German scientific medicine " .
Buttressed by the increased authority consequent to the significant advances in the medical sciences of the late 19th century onwards — including the development and application of the germ theory of disease by the chemist Louis Pasteur and the surgeon Joseph Lister , 1st Baron Lister , of microbiology co-founded by Robert Koch ( in 1885 appointed professor of hygiene at the University of Berlin ) , and of the use of X-rays ( Röntgen rays ) — the 1910 Flexner Report called upon American medical schools to follow the model set by the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine and adhere to mainstream science in their teaching and research .
This was in a belief , mentioned in the Report 's introduction , that the preliminary and professional training then prevailing in medical schools should be reformed in view of the new means for diagnosing and combating disease being made available to physicians and surgeons by the sciences on which medicine depended .
An early instance of the influence of the Flexner Report outside North America is Peking Union Medical College .
Among putative medical practices available at the time which later became known as "alternative medicine " were homeopathy ( founded in Germany in the early 19c. ) and chiropractic ( founded in North America in the late 19c. ) .
These conflicted in principle with the developments in medical science upon which the Flexner reforms were based , and they have not become compatible with further advances of medical science such as listed in Timeline of medicine and medical technology , 1900–1999 and 2000–present , nor have Ayurveda , acupuncture or other kinds of alternative medicine .
At the same time " Tropical medicine " was being developed as a specialist branch of western medicine in research establishments such as Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine founded 1898 , London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine , founded 1899 and Tulane University School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine , founded 1912 .
A distinction was being made between western scientific medicine and indigenous systems .
An example is given by an official report about indigenous systems of medicine in India , including Ayurveda , submitted by Mohammad Usman of Madras and others in 1923 .
This stated that the first question the Committee considered was " to decide whether the indigenous systems of medicine were scientific or not " .
By the later twentieth century the term 'alternative medicine ' had come into use for the purposes of public discussion , but it was not always being used with the same meaning by all parties .
Arnold S. Relman remarked in 1998 that in the best kind of medical practice , all proposed treatments must be tested objectively , and that in the end there will only be treatments that pass and those that do not , those that are proven worthwhile and those that are not .
But also in 1998 the then Surgeon General of the United States , David Satcher , issued public information about eight common alternative treatments ( including acupuncture , holistic and massage ) , together with information about common diseases and conditions , on nutrition , diet , and lifestyle changes , and about helping consumers to decipher fraud and quackery , and to find healthcare centers and doctors who practiced alternative medicine .
By 1990 , approximately 60 million Americans had used one or more complementary or alternative therapies to address health issues , according to a nationwide survey in the US published in 1993 by David Eisenberg .
A study published in the November 11 , 1998 issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association reported that 42 % of Americans had used complementary and alternative therapies , up from 34 % in 1990 .
However , despite the growth in patient demand for complementary medicine , most of the early alternative/complementary medical centers failed .
Mainly as a result of reforms following the Flexner Report of 1910 medical education in established medical schools in the US has generally not included alternative medicine as a teaching topic .
Typically , their teaching is based on current practice and scientific knowledge about : anatomy , physiology , histology , embryology , neuroanatomy , pathology , pharmacology , microbiology and immunology .
Medical schools ' teaching includes such topics as doctor-patient communication , ethics , the art of medicine , and engaging in complex clinical reasoning ( medical decision-making ) .
Writing in 2002 , Snyderman and Weil remarked that by the early twentieth century the Flexner model had helped to create the 20th-century academic health center in which education , research and practice were inseparable .
While this had much improved medical practice by defining with increasing certainty the pathophysiological basis of disease , a single-minded focus on the pathophysiological had diverted much of mainstream American medicine from clinical conditions which were not well understood in mechanistic terms and were not effectively treated by conventional therapies .
By 2001 some form of CAM training was being offered by at least 75 out of 125 medical schools in the US.
Exceptionally , the School of Medicine of the University of Maryland , Baltimore includes a research institute for integrative medicine ( a member entity of the Cochrane Collaboration ) .
Medical schools are responsible for conferring medical degrees , but a physician typically may not legally practice medicine until licensed by the local government authority .
Licensed physicians in the US who have attended one of the established medical schools there have usually graduated Doctor of Medicine ( MD) .
All states require that applicants for MD licensure be graduates of an approved medical school and complete the United States Medical Licensing Exam ( USMLE) .
The British Medical Association , in its publication " Complementary Medicine , New Approach to Good Practice " ( 1993 ) , gave as a working definition of non-conventional therapies ( including acupuncture , chiropractic and homeopathy ) : " those forms of treatment which are not widely used by the orthodox health-care professions , and the skills of which are not part of the undergraduate curriculum of orthodox medical and paramedical health-care courses " .
By 2000 some medical schools in the UK were offering CAM familiarisation courses to undergraduate medical students while some were also offering modules specifically on CAM.
The Cochrane Collaboration Complementary Medicine Field explains its " Scope and Topics " by giving a broad and general definition for complementary medicine as including practices and ideas which are outside the domain of conventional medicine in several countries and defined by its users as preventing or treating illness , or promoting health and well being , and which complement mainstream medicine in three ways : by contributing to a common whole , by satisfying a demand not met by conventional practices , and by diversifying the conceptual framework of medicine .
Proponents of an evidence-base for medicine such as the Cochrane Collaboration ( founded in 1993 and from 2011 providing input for WHO resolutions ) take a position that "all " systematic reviews of treatments , whether "mainstream " or "alternative" , ought to be held to the current standards of scientific method .
In a study titled " Development and classification of an operational definition of complementary and alternative medicine for the Cochrane Collaboration " ( 2011 ) it was proposed that indicators that a therapy is accepted include government licensing of practitioners , coverage by health insurance , statements of approval by government agencies , and recommendation as part of a practice guideline ; and that if something is currently a standard , accepted therapy , then it is not likely to be widely considered as CAM.
That alternative medicine has been on the rise "in countries where Western science and scientific method generally are accepted as the major foundations for healthcare , and 'evidence-based ' practice is the dominant paradigm " was described as an "enigma " in the Medical Journal of Australia .
Critics in the US say the expression is deceptive because it implies there is an effective alternative to science-based medicine , and that " complementary " is deceptive because the word implies that the treatment increases the effectiveness of ( complements ) science-based medicine , while alternative medicines which have been tested nearly always have no measurable positive effect compared to a placebo .
Some opponents , focused upon health fraud , misinformation , and quackery as public health problems in the US , are highly critical of alternative medicine , notably Wallace Sampson and Paul Kurtz founders of Scientific Review of Alternative Medicine and Stephen Barrett , co-founder of The National Council Against Health Fraud and webmaster of Quackwatch .
Grounds for opposing alternative medicine which have been stated in the US and elsewhere are :
Paul Offit has proposed four ways in which "alternative medicine becomes quackery " :
Alternative medicine practices and beliefs are diverse in their foundations and methodologies , and typically make use of preparations and dosages other than such as are included in the Pharmacopeia recognised by established medical schools .
The wide range of treatments and practices referred to as alternative medicine includes some stemming from nineteenth century North America , such as chiropractic and naturopathy , others , mentioned by Jütte , that originated in eighteenth - and nineteenth-century Germany , such as homeopathy and hydropathy , and some that have originated in China or India , while African , Caribbean , Pacific Island , Native American , and other regional cultures have traditional medical systems as diverse as their diversity of cultures .
Examples of CAM as a broader term for unorthodox treatment and diagnosis of illnesses , disease , infections , etc. , include yoga , acupuncture , aromatherapy , chiropractic , herbalism , homeopathy , hypnotherapy , massage , osteopathy , reflexology , relaxation therapies , spiritual healing and tai chi .
It is normally private medicine and not covered by health insurance .
It is paid out of pocket by the patient and is an expensive treatment .
CAM tends to be a treatment for upper class or more educated people .
One of the most widely used classification systems for the various branches of complementary and alternative medicine has been developed by NCCAM , the National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine , a United States government agency .
It classifies complementary and alternative therapies into five major groups , which have some overlap and two types of energy medicine are distinguished : one , " Veritable " involving scientifically observable energy , including magnet therapy , colorpuncture and light therapy ; the other " Putative " which invoke physically undetectable or unverifiable energy .
Alternative therapies based on electricity or magnetism use verifiable electromagnetic fields , such as pulsed fields , alternating-current , or direct-current fields in an unconventional manner rather than claiming the existence of imponderable or supernatural energies .
Substance based practices use substances found in nature such as herbs , foods , non-vitamin supplements and megavitamins , and minerals , and includes traditional herbal remedies with herbs specific to regions in which the cultural practices arose .
Nonvitamin supplements include fish oil , Omega-3 fatty acid , glucosamine , echinacea , flaxseed oil or pills , and ginseng , when used under a claim to have healing effects .
Mind-body interventions , working under the premise that the mind can affect "bodily functions and symptoms " , include healing claims made in hypnotherapy , and in guided imagery , meditation , guided imagery , progressive relaxation , qi gong , tai chi and yoga .
Meditation practices including mantra meditation , mindfulness meditation , yoga , tai chi , and qi gong have many uncertainties .
According to an AHRQ review , the available evidence on meditation practices through September 2005 is of poor methodological quality and definite conclusions on the effects of meditation in healthcare cannot be made using existing research .
Naturopathy is based on a belief in vitalism , which posits that a special energy called vital energy or vital force guides bodily processes such as metabolism , reproduction , growth , and adaptation .
The term was coined in 1895 by the "father of U.S. naturopathy" .
Today , naturopathy is primarily practiced in the United States and Canada .
Naturopaths in unregulated jurisdictions may use the Naturopathic Doctor designation or other titles regardless of level of education .
Traditional Chinese medicine is based on a concept of vital energy , or Qi , flowing in the body along specific pathways .
These purported pathways consist of 12 primary meridians .
TCM has many branches including , acupuncture , massage , feng shui , herbs , as well as Chinese astrology .
TCM diagnosis is primarily based on looking at the tongue , which is claimed to show the condition of the organs , as well as feeling the pulse of the radial artery , which is also claimed to show the condition of the organs .
Use of the terms " Complementary and alternative medicine ( CAM ) " and "alternative medicine " have been criticized .
CAM is not as well researched as conventional medicine which undergoes intense research before being released to the public .
Funding for research is also sparse making it difficult to do further research for effectiveness of CAM.
Most funding for CAM is funded by government agencies .
Proposed research for CAM are rejected by most private funding agencies because the results of research are not reliable .
The research for CAM has to meet certain standards from research ethics committees which most CAM researchers find almost impossible to meet .
Because the results of CAM are not quantifiable , it is hard to prove its effectiveness and it appears to work in a more holistic sense .
CAM is thought to help the patient in a mental or psychological sense since the research for CAM is hit and miss .
Even with the little research done on it , CAM has not been proven to be effective .
This creates an issue of whether the patient is receiving all the information about the treatment that is necessary for the patient to be well informed .
CAM is not as well regulated as conventional medicine .
There are ethical concerns about whether people who perform CAM have the proper knowledge to perform the treatments they give to patients .
CAM is often done by non-physicians and does not operate with the same medical licensing laws as conventional medicine .
A 2002 report on public attitudes and understanding issued by the US National Science Foundation defines the term "alternative medicine " as treatments that had not been proven effective using scientific methods .
Criticisms have come from individuals such as Wallace Sampson in an article in Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences , June 1995 .
Sampson argued that proponents of alternative medicine often used terminology which was loose or ambiguous to create the appearance that a choice between "alternative " effective treatments existed when it did not , or that there was effectiveness or scientific validity when it did not exist , or to suggest that a dichotomy existed when it did not , or to suggest that consistency with science existed when it might not ; that the term "alternative " was to suggest that a patient had a choice between effective treatments when there was not ; that use of the word " conventional " or "mainstream " was to suggest that the difference between alternative medicine and science based medicine was the prevalence of use , rather than lack of a scientific basis of alternative medicine as compared to " conventional " or "mainstream " science based medicine ; that use of the term " complementary " or "integrative " was to suggest that purported supernatural energies of alternative medicine could complement or be integrated into science based medicine .
" " Integrative medicine " " or "integrated medicine " is used to refer to the belief that medicine based on science would be improved by "integration " with alternative medical treatments practices that are not , and is substantially similar in use to the term " complementary and alternative medicine " .
Sampson has also written that CAM is the "propagation of the absurd" , and argues that "alternative " and " complementary " have been substituted for "quackery" , "dubious" , and "implausible " .
Another critic , with reference to government funding studies of integrating alternative medicine techniques into the mainstream , Steven Novella , a neurologist at Yale School of Medicine , wrote that it "is used to lend an appearance of legitimacy to treatments that are not legitimate . "
Another , Marcia Angell , argued that it was " a new name for snake oil . "
Angell considered that critics felt that healthcare practices should be classified based solely on scientific evidence , and if a treatment had been rigorously tested and found safe and effective , science based medicine will adopt it regardless of whether it was considered "alternative " to begin with .
It was thus possible for a method to change categories ( proven vs. unproven ) , based on increased knowledge of its effectiveness or lack thereof .
Prominent supporters of this position include George D. Lundberg , former editor of the Journal of the American Medical Association ( JAMA ) .
In an article first published in "CA : A Cancer Journal for Clinicians " in 1999 , " Evaluating complementary and alternative therapies for cancer patients ." ,
Barrie R. Cassileth mentioned that a 1997 letter to the US Senate Subcommittee on Public Health and Safety , which had deplored the lack of critical thinking and scientific rigor in OAM-supported research , had been signed by four Nobel Laureates and other prominent scientists .
( This was supported by the National Institutes of Health ( NIH) . )
In March 2009 a " Washington Post " staff writer reported that the impending national discussion about broadening access to health care , improving medical practice and saving money was giving a group of scientists an opening to propose shutting down the National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine , quoting one of them , Steven Salzberg , a genome researcher and computational biologist at the University of Maryland , saying " One of our concerns is that NIH is funding pseudoscience . "
They argued that the vast majority of studies were based on fundamental misunderstandings of physiology and disease , and have shown little or no effect .
Stephen Barrett , founder and operator of Quackwatch , has argued that practices labeled "alternative " should be reclassified as either genuine , experimental , or questionable .
Here he defines genuine as being methods that have sound evidence for safety and effectiveness , experimental as being unproven but with a plausible rationale for effectiveness , and questionable as groundless without a scientifically plausible rationale .
Sampson has also pointed out that CAM tolerated contradiction without thorough reason and experiment .
Barrett has pointed out that there is a policy at the NIH of never saying something does n't work only that a different version or dose might give different results .
Barrett also expressed concern that , just because some "alternatives " have merit , there is the impression that the rest deserve equal consideration and respect even though most are worthless , since they are all classified under the one heading of alternative medicine .
Writers such as Carl Sagan ( 1934-1996 ) , a noted astrophysicist , advocate of skeptical thinking ( Scientific skepticism ) and the author of " The Demon– Haunted World : Science as a Candle in the Dark " ( 1996 ) , have described the lack of empirical evidence to support the existence of the putative energy fields on which these therapies are predicated .
According to two writers , Wallace Sampson and K. Butler , marketing is part of the medical training required in chiropractic education , and propaganda methods in alternative medicine have been traced back to those used by Hitler and Goebels in their promotion of pseudoscience in medicine .
The NCCAM budget has been criticized because , despite the duration and intensity of studies to measure the efficacy of alternative medicine , there had been no effective CAM treatments supported by scientific evidence as of 2002 , according to the QuackWatch website ; the NCCAM budget has been on a sharp and sustained rise .
Critics of the Center argue that the plausibility of interventions such as botanical remedies , diet , relaxation therapies and yoga should not be used to support research on implausible interventions based on superstition and belief in the supernatural , and that the plausible methods can be studied just as well in other parts of NIH , where they should be made to compete on an equal footing with other research projects .
Richard Dawkins , an English evolutionary biologist and author , in an essay in his book " A Devil 's Chaplain " ( 2003 ) ( chapter 4.4) , has defined alternative medicine as a " set of practices that cannot be tested , refuse to be tested , or consistently fail tests . "
Another essay in the same book ( chapter 1.4 ) quoted from an article by John Diamond in " The Independent " : " There is really no such thing as alternative medicine , just medicine that works and medicine that does n't . "
Dawkins has argued that , if a technique is demonstrated effective in properly performed trials , it ceases to be alternative and simply becomes medicine .
As it relates to ethics , in November 2011 Edzard Ernst stated that the "level of misinformation about alternative medicine has now reached the point where it has become dangerous and unethical .
So far , alternative medicine has remained an ethics-free zone .
Ernst requested that Prince Charles recall two guides to alternative medicine published by the Foundation for Integrated Health , on the grounds that "both contain numerous misleading and inaccurate claims concerning the supposed benefits of alternative medicine " and that " [the nation cannot be served by promoting ineffective and sometimes dangerous alternative treatments . "
In general , he believes that CAM can and should be subjected to scientific testing .
A research methods expert and author of " Snake Oil Science" , R. Barker Bausell , has stated that "it 's become politically correct to investigate nonsense . "
There are concerns that just having NIH support is being used to give unfounded "legitimacy to treatments that are not legitimate . "
Use of placebos in order to achieve a placebo effect in integrative medicine has been criticized as "diverting research time , money , and other resources from more fruitful lines of investigation in order to pursue a theory that has no basis in biology " .
Another critic has argued that academic proponents of integrative medicine sometimes recommend misleading patients by using known placebo treatments in order to achieve a placebo effect .
However , a 2010 survey of family physicians found that 56 % of respondents said they had used a placebo in clinical practice as well .
Eighty-five percent of respondents believed placebos can have both psychological and physical benefits .
Integrative medicine has been criticized in that its practitioners , trained in science based medicine , deliberately mislead patients by pretending placebos are not .
" Quackademic medicine " is a pejorative term used for "integrative medicine " , which is considered to be an infiltration of quackery into academic science-based medicine .
An analysis of trends in the criticism of complementary and alternative medicine ( CAM ) in five prestigious American medical journals during the period of reorganization within medicine ( 1965–1999 ) was reported as showing that the medical profession had responded to the growth of CAM in three phases , and that in each phase there had been changes in the medical marketplace which influenced the type of response in the journals .
Changes included relaxed medical licensing , the development of managed care , rising consumerism , and the establishment of the USA Office of Alternative Medicine ( now National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine ) .
In the " condemnation " phase , from the late 1960s to the early 1970s , authors had ridiculed , exaggerated the risks , and petitioned the state to contain CAM ; in the "reassessment " phase ( mid-1970s through early 1990s ) , when increased consumer utilization of CAM was prompting concern , authors had pondered whether patient dissatisfaction and shortcomings in conventional care contributed to the trend ; in the "integration " phase of the 1990s physicians began learning to work around or administer CAM , and the subjugation of CAM to scientific scrutiny had become the primary means of control .
Complementary and alternative medicine ( CAM ) has been described as a broad domain of healing resources that encompasses all health systems , modalities , and practices and their accompanying theories and beliefs , other than those intrinsic to the politically dominant health system of a particular society or culture in a given historical period .
CAM includes all such practices and ideas self-defined by their users as preventing or treating illness or promoting health and well-being .
Boundaries within CAM and between the CAM domain and that of the dominant system are not always sharp or fixed .
About 50 % of people in developed countries use some kind of complementary and alternative medicine other than prayer for health .
A British telephone survey by the BBC of 1209 adults in 1998 shows that around 20 % of adults in Britain had used alternative medicine in the past 12 months .
About 40 % of cancer patients use some form of CAM.
In developing nations , access to essential medicines is severely restricted by lack of resources and poverty .
Traditional remedies , often closely resembling or forming the basis for alternative remedies , may comprise primary healthcare or be integrated into the healthcare system .
In Africa , traditional medicine is used for 80 % of primary healthcare , and in developing nations as a whole over one-third of the population lack access to essential medicines .
In respect of taxation in the USA , the Internal Revenue Service has discriminated in favour of medical expenses for acupuncture and chiropractic ( and others including Christian Science practitioners ) but against homeopathy and the use of non-prescription required medicine .
The use of alternative medicine in the US has increased , with a 50 percent increase in expenditures and a 25 percent increase in the use of alternative therapies between 1990 and 1997 in America .
Americans spend many billions on the therapies annually .
Most Americans used CAM to treat and/or prevent musculoskeletal conditions or other conditions associated with chronic or recurring pain .
In America , women were more likely than men to use CAM , with the biggest difference in use of mind-body therapies including prayer specifically for health reasons " .
In 2008 , more than 37 % of American hospitals offered alternative therapies , up from 26.5 percent in 2005 , and 25 % in 2004 .
More than 70 % of the hospitals offering CAM were in urban areas .
A survey of Americans found that 88 percent agreed that " there are some good ways of treating sickness that medical science does not recognize" .
Use of magnets was the most common tool in energy medicine in America , and among users of it , 58 percent described it as at least " sort of scientific" , when it is not at all scientific .
In 2002 , at least 60 percent of US medical schools have at least some class time spent teaching alternative therapies .
" Therapeutic touch" , was taught at more than 100 colleges and universities in 75 countries before the practice was debunked by a nine-year-old child for a school science project .
A 1997 survey found that 13.7 % of respondents in the US had sought the services of both a medical doctor and an alternative medicine practitioner .
The same survey found that 96 % of respondents who sought the services of an alternative medicine practitioner also sought the services of a medical doctor in the past 12 months .
Medical doctors are often unaware of their patient 's use of alternative medical treatments as only 38.5 % of the patients alternative therapies were discussed with their medical doctor .
According to Michael H. Cohen , US regulation of alternative includes state licensure of healthcare providers and scope of practice limits on practice by non-MD healthcare professionals ; state-law malpractice rules ( standard of care limits on professional negligence ) ; discipline of practitioners by state regulatory boards ; and federal regulation such as food and drug law .
He argues that US regulation of alternative medicine " seeks to integrate biomedical , holistic , and social models of health care in ways that maximize patients ’ well-being hile still protecting patients from fraud . "
The most common CAM therapies used in the US in 2002 were prayer ( 45.2 % ) , herbalism ( 18.9 % ) , breathing meditation ( 11.6 % ) , meditation ( 7.6 % ) , chiropractic medicine ( 7.5 % ) , yoga ( 5.1%-6.1 % ) ,
body work ( 5.0 % ) , diet-based therapy ( 3.5 % ) , progressive relaxation ( 3.0 % ) , mega-vitamin therapy ( 2.8 % ) and Visualization ( 2.1 % )
In Britain , the most often used alternative therapies were Alexander technique , Aromatherapy , Bach and other flower remedies , Body work therapies including massage , Counseling stress therapies , hypnotherapy , Meditation , Reflexology , Shiatsu , Ayurvedic medicine , Nutritional medicine , and Yoga .
Ayurvedic medicine remedies are mainly plant based with some use of animal materials .
Safety concerns include the use of herbs containing toxic compounds and the lack of quality control in Ayurvedic facilities .
According to the National Health Service ( England ) , the most commonly used complementary and alternative medicines ( CAM ) supported by the NHS in the UK are : acupuncture , aromatherapy , chiropractic , homeopathy , massage , osteopathy and clinical hypnotherapy .
" Complementary medicine treatments used for pain include : acupuncture , low-level laser therapy , meditation , aroma therapy , Chinese medicine , dance therapy , music therapy , massage , herbalism , therapeutic touch , yoga , osteopathy , chiropractic , naturopathy , and homeopathy . "
Complementary therapies are often used in palliative care or by practitioners attempting to manage chronic pain in patients .
Integrative medicine is considered more acceptable in the interdisciplinary approach used in palliative care than in other areas of medicine .
" From its early experiences of care for the dying , palliative care took for granted the necessity of placing patient values and lifestyle habits at the core of any design and delivery of quality care at the end of life .
If the patient desired complementary therapies , and as long as such treatments provided additional support and did not endanger the patient , they were considered acceptable . "
The non-pharmacologic interventions of complementary medicine can employ mind-body interventions designed to "reduce pain and concomitant mood disturbance and increase quality of life . "
In Austria and Germany complementary and alternative medicine is mainly in the hands of doctors with MDs , and half or more of the American alternative practitioners are licensed MDs .
In Germany herbs are tightly regulated : half are prescribed by doctors and covered by health insurance .
Some professions of complementary/traditional/alternative medicine , such as chiropractic medicine , have achieved full regulation in North America and other parts of the world and are regulated in a manner similar to that governing science-based medicine .
In contrast , other approaches may be partially recognized and others have no regulation at all .
Regulation and licensing of alternative medicine ranges widely from country to country , and state to state .
Government bodies in the USA and elsewhere have published information or guidance about alternative medicine .
One of those is the U.S. Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) , which mentions specifically homeopathic products , traditional Chinese medicine and Ayurvedic products .
A document which the FDA has issued for comment is headed " Guidance for Industry : Complementary and Alternative Medicine Products and Their Regulation by the Food and Drug Administration " , last updated on March 2 , 2007 .
The document opens with three preliminary paragraphs which explain that "in the document " :
Alternative therapies lack the requisite scientific validation , and their effectiveness is either unproved or disproved .
Many of the claims regarding the efficacy of alternative medicines are controversial , since research on them is frequently of low quality and methodologically flawed .
Selective publication of results ( misleading results from only publishing positive results , and not all results ) , marked differences in product quality and standardisation , and some companies making unsubstantiated claims , call into question the claims of efficacy of isolated examples where herbs may have some evidence of containing chemicals that may affect health .
" The Scientific Review of Alternative Medicine " points to confusions in the general population - a person may attribute symptomatic relief to an otherwise-ineffective therapy just because they are taking something ( the placebo effect ) ; the natural recovery from or the cyclical nature of an illness ( the regression fallacy ) gets misattributed to an alternative medicine being taken ; a person not diagnosed with science based medicine may never originally have had a true illness diagnosed as an alternative disease category .
Edzard Ernst characterized the evidence for many alternative techniques as weak , nonexistent , or negative and in 2011 published his estimate that about 7.4 % were based on " sound evidence" , although he believes that may be an overestimate due to various reasons .
Ernst has concluded that 95 % of the alternative treatments he and his team studied , including acupuncture , herbal medicine , homeopathy , and reflexology , are " statistically indistinguishable from placebo treatments " , but he also believes there is something that conventional doctors can usefully learn from the chiropractors and homeopath : this is the therapeutic value of the placebo effect , one of the strangest phenomena in medicine .
In 2003 , a project funded by the CDC identified 208 condition-treatment pairs , of which 58 % had been studied by at least one randomized controlled trial (RCT) , and 23 % had been assessed with a meta-analysis .
According to a 2005 book by a US Institute of Medicine panel , the number of RCTs focused on CAM has risen dramatically .
The book cites Vickers ( 1998 ) , who found that many of the CAM-related RCTs are in the Cochrane register , but 19 % of these trials were not in MEDLINE , and 84 % were in conventional medical journals .
As of 2005 , the Cochrane Library had 145 CAM-related Cochrane systematic reviews and 340 non-Cochrane systematic reviews .
An analysis of the conclusions of only the 145 Cochrane reviews was done by two readers .
In 83 % of the cases , the readers agreed .
In the 17 % in which they disagreed , a third reader agreed with one of the initial readers to set a rating .
These studies found that , for CAM , 38.4 % concluded positive effect or possibly positive ( 12.4 % ) , 4.8 % concluded no effect , 0.69 % concluded harmful effect , and 56.6 % concluded insufficient evidence .
An assessment of conventional treatments found that 41.3 % concluded positive or possibly positive effect , 20 % concluded no effect , 8.1 % concluded net harmful effects , and 21.3 % concluded insufficient evidence .
However , the CAM review used the more developed 2004 Cochrane database , while the conventional review used the initial 1998 Cochrane database .
Most alternative medical treatments are not patentable , which may lead to less research funding from the private sector .
In addition , in most countries , alternative treatments ( in contrast to pharmaceuticals ) can be marketed without any proof of efficacy—also a disincentive for manufacturers to fund scientific research .
Some have proposed adopting a prize system to reward medical research .
Increasing the funding for research on alternative medicine techniques is the purpose of the US National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine .
NCCAM and its predecessor , the Office of Alternative Medicine , have spent more than $ 2.5 billion on such research since 1992 ; this research has largely not demonstrated the efficacy of alternative treatments .
In the same way as for conventional therapies , drugs , and interventions , it can be difficult to test the efficacy of alternative medicine in clinical trials .
In instances where an established , effective , treatment for a condition is already available , the Helsinki Declaration states that withholding such treatment is unethical in most circumstances .
Use of standard-of-care treatment in addition to an alternative technique being tested may produce confounded or difficult-to-interpret results .
Homeopathy is based on the belief that a disease can be cured by a very low dose of substance that creates similar symptoms in a healthy person .
This conflicts with fundamental concepts of physics and chemistry and there is no good evidence from reviews of research to support its use .
Many of the claims regarding the safety and efficacy of alternative medicine are controversial .
Some alternative treatments have been associated with unexpected side effects , which can be fatal .
One of the commonly voiced concerns about complementary alternative medicine ( CAM ) is the manner in which is regulated .
There have been significant developments in how CAMs should be assessed prior to re-sale in the United Kingdom and the European Union ( EU) in the last 2 years .
Despite this , it has been suggested that current regulatory bodies have been ineffective in preventing deception of patients as many companies have re-labelled their drugs to avoid the new laws .
There is no general consensus about how to balance consumer protection ( from false claims , toxicity , and advertising ) with freedom to choose remedies .
Advocates of CAM suggest that regulation of the industry will adversely affect patients looking for alternative ways to manage their symptoms , even if many of the benefits may represent the placebo affect .
Some contend that alternative medicines should not require any more regulation than over-the-counter medicines that can also be toxic in overdose ( such as paracetamol ) .
Forms of alternative medicine that are biologically active can be dangerous even when used in conjunction with conventional medicine .
Examples include immuno-augmentation therapy , shark cartilage , bioresonance therapy , oxygen and ozone therapies , insulin potentiation therapy .
Some herbal remedies can cause dangerous interactions with chemotherapy drugs , radiation therapy , or anesthetics during surgery , among other problems .
An anecdotal example of these dangers was reported by Associate Professor Alastair MacLennan of Adelaide University , Australia regarding a patient who almost bled to death on the operating table after neglecting to mention that she had been taking "natural " potions to "build up her strength " before the operation , including a powerful anticoagulant that nearly caused her death .
To " ABC Online" , MacLennan also gives another possible mechanism :
Conventional treatments are subjected to testing for undesired side-effects , whereas alternative treatments , in general , are not subjected to such testing at all .
Any treatment – whether conventional or alternative – that has a biological or psychological effect on a patient may also have potential to possess dangerous biological or psychological side-effects .
Attempts to refute this fact with regard to alternative treatments sometimes use the "appeal to nature " fallacy , i .e . , " that which is natural cannot be harmful" .
An exception to the normal thinking regarding side-effects is Homeopathy .
Since 1938 , the U.S. Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) has regulated homeopathic products in " several significantly different ways from other drugs . "
Homeopathic preparations , termed "remedies " , are extremely dilute , often far beyond the point where a single molecule of the original active ( and possibly toxic ) ingredient is likely to remain .
They are , thus , considered safe on that count , but " their products are exempt from good manufacturing practice requirements related to expiration dating and from finished product testing for identity and strength" , and their alcohol concentration may be much higher than allowed in conventional drugs .
Those having experienced or perceived success with one alternative therapy for a minor ailment may be convinced of its efficacy and persuaded to extrapolate that success to some other alternative therapy for a more serious , possibly life-threatening illness .
For this reason , critics argue that therapies that rely on the placebo effect to define success are very dangerous .
According to mental health journalist Scott Lilienfeld in 2002 , "unvalidated or scientifically unsupported mental health practices can lead individuals to forgo effective treatments " and refers to this as "opportunity cost " .
Individuals who spend large amounts of time and money on ineffective treatments may be left with precious little of either , and may forfeit the opportunity to obtain treatments that could be more helpful .
In short , even innocuous treatments can indirectly produce negative outcomes .
Between 2001 and 2003 , four children died in Australia because their parents chose ineffective naturopathic , homeopathic , or other alternative medicines and diets rather than conventional therapies .
There have always been "many therapies offered outside of conventional cancer treatment centers and based on theories not found in biomedicine .
These alternative cancer cures have often been described as 'unproven , ' suggesting that appropriate clinical trials have not been conducted and that the therapeutic value of the treatment is unknown . "
However , "many alternative cancer treatments have been investigated in good-quality clinical trials , and they have been shown to be ineffective ...The label 'unproven' is inappropriate for such therapies ; it is time to assert that many alternative cancer therapies have been 'disproven' . "
Funding for research into effectiveness of alternative treatments comes from a variety of public and private sources .
In the USA , one conduit for funding and information is the National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine (NCCAM ) , a division of DHS 's National Institutes of Health ( NIH) .
Other governments have various levels of funding ; the Dutch government funded CAM research between 1986 and 2003 , but formally ended it in 2006 .
Physicians who practice complementary medicine usually discuss and advise patients as to available complementary therapies .
Patients often express interest in mind-body complementary therapies because they offer a non-drug approach to treating some health conditions .
Some mind-body techniques , such as cognitive-behavioral therapy , were once considered complementary medicine , but are now a part of conventional medicine in the United States .
Against alternative medicine it has been argued that in addition to the social-cultural underpinnings of the popularity of alternative medicine , there are several psychological issues that are critical to its growth .
One of the most critical is the placebo effect , which is a well-established observation in medicine .
Related to it are similar psychological effects such as the will to believe , cognitive biases that help maintain self-esteem and promote harmonious social functioning , and the "post hoc , ergo propter hoc " fallacy .
CAM 's popularity may be related to other factors which Edzard Ernst mentioned in an interview in " The Independent " :
Ernst blames the providers , customers and the doctors whose neglect , he says , has created the opening into which alternative therapists have stepped .
There are 40 million websites and 39.9 million tell lies , sometimes outrageous lies .
They mislead cancer patients , who are encouraged not only to pay their last penny but to be treated with something that shortens their lives .
It needs gullibility for the industry to succeed .
It does n't make me popular with the public , but it 's the truth .
In a paper published in October 2010 entitled " The public 's enthusiasm for complementary and alternative medicine amounts to a critique of mainstream medicine " , Ernst described these views in greater detail and concluded :
A study published in 1998 indicates that a majority of alternative medicine use was in conjunction with standard medical treatments .
Approximately 4.4 percent of those studied used alternative medicine as a replacement for conventional medicine .
The research found that those having used alternative medicine tended to have higher education or report poorer health status .
Dissatisfaction with conventional medicine was not a meaningful factor in the choice , but rather the majority of alternative medicine users appear to be doing so largely because " they find these healthcare alternatives to be more congruent with their own values , beliefs , and philosophical orientations toward health and life . "
In particular , subjects reported a holistic orientation to health , a transformational experience that changed their worldview , identification with a number of groups committed to environmentalism , feminism , psychology , and/or spirituality and personal growth , or that they were suffering from a variety of common and minor ailments – notable ones being anxiety , back problems , and chronic pain .
Authors have speculated on the socio-cultural and psychological reasons for the appeal of alternative medicines among that minority using them "in lieu " of conventional medicine .
There are several socio-cultural reasons for the interest in these treatments centered on the low level of scientific literacy among the public at large and a concomitant increase in antiscientific attitudes and new age mysticism .
Related to this are vigorous marketing of extravagant claims by the alternative medical community combined with inadequate media scrutiny and attacks on critics .
There is also an increase in conspiracy theories toward conventional medicine and pharmaceutical companies , mistrust of traditional authority figures , such as the physician , and a dislike of the current delivery methods of scientific biomedicine , all of which have led patients to seek out alternative medicine to treat a variety of ailments .
Many patients lack access to contemporary medicine , due to a lack of private or public health insurance , which leads them to seek out lower-cost alternative medicine .
Medical doctors are also aggressively marketing alternative medicine to profit from this market .
Patients can also be averse to the painful , unpleasant , and sometimes-dangerous side effects of biomedical treatments .
Treatments for severe diseases such as cancer and HIV infection have well-known , significant side-effects .
Even low-risk medications such as antibiotics can have potential to cause life-threatening anaphylactic reactions in a very few individuals .
Also , many medications may cause minor but bothersome symptoms such as cough or upset stomach .
In all of these cases , patients may be seeking out alternative treatments to avoid the adverse effects of conventional treatments .
Schofield and others , in a systematic review published in 2011 , make ten recommendations which they think may increase the effectiveness of consultations in a conventional ( here : oncology ) setting , such as " Ask questions about CAM use at critical points in the illness trajectory " ; " Respond to the person 's emotional state " ; and " Provide balanced , evidence-based advice " .
They suggest that this approach may address " ... concerns surrounding CAM use encourage informed decision-making about CAM and ultimately , improve outcomes for patients " .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
An automatic number announcement circuit ( ANAC ) is a component of a central office of a telephone company that provides a service to installation and service technicians to determine the telephone number of a line .
The facility has a telephone number that may be called to listen to an automatic announcement that includes the caller 's telephone number .
The ANAC number is useful primarily during the installation of landline telephones to quickly identify one of multiple lines .
A technician calls the local telephone number of the automatic number announcement service .
This call is connected to equipment at a local central office that uses a voice synthesizer or digital samples to announce the telephone number of the line calling in .
The main purpose of this system is to allow telephone company technicians to identify the telephone line they are connected to .
Automatic number announcement systems are based on automatic number identification , and meant for phone company technicians , the ANAC system works with unlisted numbers , numbers with caller ID blocking , and numbers with no outgoing calls allowed .
Installers of multi-line business services where outgoing calls from all lines display the company 's main number on call display can use ANAC to identify a specific line in the system , even if CID displays every line as "line one " .
Some ANACs are very regional or local in scope , while others are state-/province - or area-code-wide : there appears to be no consistent national system for them .
Every telephone company , whether large or small , determines its own ANAC for each individual central office , which tends to perpetuate the current situation of a mess of overlapping and/or spotty areas of coverage .
No official lists of ANAC numbers are published as telephone companies believe overuse of these numbers could make them more likely to be busy when needed by installers .
Under the North American Numbering Plan , almost all North American area codes reserve telephone numbers beginning with "958 " and "959 " for internal local and long distance testing ( respectively ) , sometimes called plant testing .
Numbers within this block are used for various test utilities such as a ringback number ( to test the ringer when installing telephone sets ) , milliwatt tone ( a number simply answers with a continuous test tone ) and a loop around ( which connects a call to another inbound call to the same or another test number ) .
ANAC numbers can also appear in the "958 " range , but there is no requirement that they reside there .
In some area codes , multiple additional prefixes had been reserved for test purposes , in addition to the standard 958 and 959 .
Many area codes reserved 999 ; 320 was also formerly reserved in Bell Canada territory .
As widespread inefficiencies in numbering ( such as the assignment of entire blocks of 10000 numbers to every competing carrier in every small village to support local number portability schemes ) have created shortages of available numbers , these prefixes are often "reclaimed " and issued as standard exchanges , moving the handful of numbers in them to one standard test exchange (usually 958 ) .
Some carriers have been known to disable payphone calls to 958 or 959 test lines , such as Bell Canada 's system-wide ANAC line at 958-2580 or (area code ) 958-6111 .
Conversely , a standard line on which voice service has been unsubscribed ( such as an ADSL dry loop ) may still accept calls to the 958 test exchange but not allow calls to standard numbers .
This " soft disconnect " condition is intended to allow calls to 9-1-1 emergency services and to the telco business office to order telephone service , but to no other numbers .
Some large telephone companies have toll-free numbers set up .
In most cases , these numbers remain undisclosed to prevent abuse , but MCI maintains this widely published , toll-free ANAC : 1-800-437-7950 .
This is distinct from technical support and other lines which use ANI so that a computer can automatically display the customer 's account on a "screen pop " for the next available customer service representative : the MCI number is intended specifically for ANAC use .
Formerly , some companies changed their ANAC number every month for secrecy ; this is still the case with a few numbers .
In one example of this concern , most payphones in the United States are assigned a telephone number and can ring if the number is called .
The phone can then be used to make and receive calls by anyone , making it a potential tool in anonymous criminal activity such as narcotics trafficking .
Where a payphone does not have any number listed on the unit , the number can be discovered by calling an ANAC service .
Late in the 20th century , caller ID and prepaid cellphone service became commonplace .
These services being more easily exploited for criminal purposes , this type of abuse of payphones faded from concern .
In Canada , this behaviour has always been more difficult .
As a matter of course , incoming calls to payphones are disabled ; furthermore , the Bell ANAC number is also disabled ( although the telephone number is marked on the payphone itself as it is needed to report a non-working coin 'phone to 6-1-1 repair service ) .
There are some private national toll-free numbers that use ANI and then have a computer read back the number that is calling , but these are not intended for use in identifying the customer 's own phone number .
They are used in order for the agent in the call center to confirm the phone the customer is calling from , so that a computer can automatically display the customer 's account on a "screen pop " for the next available customer service representative ; they are distinct from purpose-made toll-free ANAC numbers .
Regardless , if one were to call one of these numbers , listen for the number confirmation and hang up , they would in effect be using this system as if it were an ANAC.
One such toll-free service is one owned by MCI - 1-800-444-4444 .
This number is easy to remember and , when called , will read back the number after a very short message .
It is noteworthy that a suspended or out of service line or an incoming only line would not be able to reach any toll-free numbers .
In some regions , there are several numbers , depending on the telephone company or the area code of the caller , as there can be several central offices serving some areas .
if a prefix outside the 958 or 959 range is listed as a test exchange , these may be reclaimed and issued as standard numbers at a later date .
NANPA 's utilised codes report will indicate 'UA' (unassignable ) for valid test prefixes ; if a formerly 'UA' code newly appears on the available list or becomes an active exchange , any former test numbers from its time as a reserved prefix are presumable as invalid and deprecated .
N11 prefixes such as 211 , 311 and 511 are also often disappearing as test numbers as these codes are reassigned to local services such as community information ,
These numbers appear on lists circulated online , many from the 1990s .
The current use of exchange prefixes for each area code is listed by CNAC ; if an exchange changes from "plant test " to reclaimed or active , any former test numbers with the associated prefix are invalidated .
Additional plant test codes may be in use locally in some areas :
Occasionally , a number in an existing , standard local exchange in the area is used .
These will incur a toll ( and might not work ) outside their home area .
Some may be announcing caller ID , which is not the same as ANI.
As standard local calls , they are not accessible from ADSL "dry loop" , inbound-only or unsubscribed lines :
In Bell Canada territory , +1-areacode-320 was formerly reserved for 320-xxxx test numbers ; these were moved to the 958-xxxx range and 320-xxxx reclaimed for use as a standard exchange .
The use of N11 prefixes ( such as 3-1-1 ) for test numbers is also deprecated as 3-1-1 now often reaches city hall or municipal services while 2-1-1 is local community information .
Some lists also mention 1-555-1313 as ANAC ( 506 New Brunswick ) .
The purpose of +1-areacode-555-1313 , a pay-per-use "name that number " reverse lookup information service introduced in the mid-1990s , differs from ANAC.
ANAC announces the caller 's own number ; the reverse lookup gives the directory name for a listed telephone number input by the user .
555-1313 is one of the rare uses of 555 (telephone number ) for other than the standard 555-1212 directory information line .
" Please note that it is always preferable to call the local ANAC ; only if the local ANAC number can not be called is it advisable to call a toll-free ANAC number .
It is also preferable to call an open ANAC rather than the password-protected one given below . "
" The below numbers are not true ANAC numbers ; however , they do read back one 's phone number .
These numbers provide valuable services to the customers they serve ; it is , therefore , inadvisable to misuse them . "
This service announces the line number on all Eircom lines , including lines where calls are carried by another provider using carrier preselect .
The same number also works for Smart Telecom lines provided by local-loop unbundling .
The number is called out without the leading 0. For example , 021 XXX XXXX is read back as " 21 XXX XXXX" .
There is also an extended ANAC service for identifying which carrier handles calls .
Dialling these numbers will cause the local switch to announce which carrier the calls are being routed through for a specific category of calls .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
The Acorn Electron is a budget version of the BBC Micro educational/home computer made by Acorn Computers Ltd.
It has 32 kilobytes of RAM , and its ROM includes BBC BASIC v2 along with its operating system .
The Electron was able to save and load programs onto audio cassette via a supplied converter cable that connected it to any standard tape recorder that had the correct sockets .
It was capable of basic graphics , and could display onto either a television set , a colour (RGB ) monitor or a "green screen " monitor .
At its peak , the Electron was the third best selling micro in the United Kingdom , and total lifetime game sales for the Electron exceeded those of the BBC Micro .
The Electron was developed during 1983 as a cheap sibling for the BBC Micro with the intention of capturing the low-cost Christmas sales market for that year .
Although Acorn were able to shrink substantially the same functionality as the BBC into just one chip , manufacturing problems meant that despite pre orders of 300,000 , only 30,000 machines were available for the Christmas period — to the extent that some shops reported eight presales for every delivered machine , there were even press reports of fights in places such as Rumbelows over the slim shipments of machines , as parents could not get an Electron , they turned to other readily available machines such as the ZX Spectrum and Commodore 64 .
Unfortunately for Acorn , in the months after Christmas , the firm was tied to accepting delivery of the remaining pre order machines , and there was a warehouse in Wellingborough with unsold machines piled up to the ceiling .
This was a blow from which the machine never fully recovered , although games sales for it would ultimately outstrip those of the BBC Micro .
Following Olivetti 's 1985 cash injection into Acorn the machine was effectively sidelined .
With hindsight , the machine lacked the RAM ( a typical program would need to fit in only around 20 kB once display memory is subtracted ) and processing power to take on the prevailing Sinclair ZX Spectrum and Commodore 64 .
Despite this , several features that would later be associated with BBC Master and Archimedes were first features of Electron expansion units , including ROM cartridge slots and the Advanced Disc Filing System — a hierarchical improvement to the BBC 's original Disc Filing System .
While it may not have been as popular as the Spectrum , Commodore 64 or Amstrad CPC , it did sell in sufficient numbers to ensure that new software was being produced right up until the early 1990s .
This meant the Electron had a lifespan not much shorter than those more popular micros and much longer than competitors such as the Oric-1 and Dragon 32 .
The Acorn Plus 1 added two ROM cartridge slots , an analogue interface ( supporting two channels ) and a Centronics parallel port .
The analogue interface was normally used for joysticks , the parallel for a printer .
The ROM slots could be booted from via the " Shift+BREAK" key-combination .
( The slot at the front of the interface took priority if both were populated ) .
Access to ROM memory occurred at 2 MHz regardless of graphics mode so theoretically programs released on ROM could run at least twice as fast as those released on tape or disc .
Despite this all of the games released on ROM were packaged as " serial ROMS" , from which the micro would load programs into main memory in exactly the same way as if it were loading from tape .
This meant that programs did not need to be modified for their new memory location but gave no execution speed benefits whatsoever .
The Cartridge-port ROM-slots provided additional control lines , ( compared to the lines available via the Edge-connector on the rear of the Electron ) , such as ROMSTBY , SNDIN , ROMQA , and some additional Voltage sources ( +16V ) etc .
The total number of lines exposed via the Cartridge port almost matched those from the 1 MHz bus of the BBC .
Additional peripheral cartridge-holders by companies such as P.R.E.S. (via their ARA/ARA2/ASR products ) allowed ' Sideways ROM' capability , that allowed the standard Acorn ROM space to be programmatically mapped out for alternative EPROMs, either physically via ZIF Sockets , or 'virtually ' via ROM-images loaded into ( battery-backed ) RAM in the same ROM memory space .
This enabled the Electron to achieve the same functionality as that provided by the Expansion-ROM slots under the keyboard and on the bottom-left of the BBC Micro B keyboard .
The addition of the Plus 1 added a number of new *FX and OSBYTE calls that allowed the OS to read the values from the analogue and parallel interfaces .
The Plus 1 needed memory page &D for its workspace , and some games used this space .
To disable the Plus 1 , after pressing BREAK , the following commands could be issued :
Per a News article on Page # 9 of the October 1984 issue of Acorn User , the Acorn 'Plus 2' interface was due to provide Econet capability .
This interface did not make it to market .
The Acorn Plus 3 was a hardware module that connected independently of the Plus 1 and provided a double-density 3½ " disc drive connected through a WD1770 drive controller and an ADFS ROM.
There were two versions of the Plus 3 produced : A Single-sided and a Double-sided drive version .
Because the WD1770 is capable of single density mode and uses the same IBM360 derived floppy disc format as the Intel 8271 found in the BBC Micro , it was also possible to run a DFS filing system with an alternate ROM , such as the P.R.E.S AP4 interface .
The Plus 3 reset PAGE to &1D00 , reducing the amount of free RAM available to user .
The ADFS system could be temporarily disabled ( and PAGE reset to &E00 ) via the *NOADFS command .
Alternative WD1770-based DFS and ADFS interfaces such as the P.R.E.S AP4 and 'ADFS E00' products left PAGE at &E00 , and did not require the presence of the ZYSYSHELP file ( see below )
Disks had to be manually mounted and dismounted using the *MOUNT / *DISMOUNT commands , or using the CTRL-A+BREAK key combination .
Disks could also be booted from via the standard " Shift+BREAK" key-combination , if the !BOOT file was present on the disk .
This behaviour was the same as on the BBC Micro .
The Plus 3 included an uprated square black power supply unit with mains cord , manufactured by STC , designed and manufactured in England to BS 415 and BS 5850 , that was designed to power the Plus 3 , in addition to the Electron and the Plus 1 interface as well .
This replaced the original cream-coloured "wall wart " style power supply , designed to BS 415 and manufactured in Hong Kong .
The original Electron Edge-connector was repeated on the back of the Plus3 , in addition to a secondary smaller edge-connector , that enabled additional drives to be connected ( Shugart-compatible connection ) .
The secondary edge-connector could not power external drives .
Repair note : If the internal power-supply connector , used to power the existing internal 3.5" drive is damaged , and requires replacement , then the original AMP 800-930 4-pin connector , which was already in short supply during the original production run , may be replaced with a Molex 5264 50-37-5043 " Mini-SPOX " connector as an alternative .
If using the Plus3 in screen modes 0-3 , the pseudo-variable TIME would be thrown off , as the interrupts were disabled during disk access in these modes .
Per a News article on page 9 of the October 1984 issue of Acorn User , the Plus 3 was originally destined to have used the Intel 8272 disk controller , ( and not 8271 , which were in short supply at the time ) .
The ADFS file format used the bytes Hugo to delimit the directory names on the disc , named after ADFS inventor Hugo Tyson .
Another quirk was the presence of the file ZYSYSHELP which was required by the system , and created during formatting .
Acorn 's v1.0 ADFS implementation on the Electron was unreliable when writing to the first few tracks of a disc , so this was a "fix " and simply involved writing a file full of garbage to the suspect part .
Disc corruption could also occur if attempting to use the *COMPACT command without disabling the blinking cursor with the following command :
Disc formatting was done via the *EFORM command , vs the more familiar *FORM40/*FORM80 DFS commands .
Note additionally that the *EFORM command differs from the equivalent *AFORM command for the 1770 ADFS on the BBC Microcomputer .
This is possibly as a result of needing to create the ZYSYSHELP file on the Electron .
The *EFORM command was only supplied on the Welcome disc that was shipped with the Plus3 , and was not included in the ROM.
As a games machine the Electron shared the same failing as the Sinclair Spectrum in not having a joystick port .
This was quickly remedied by First Byte Computers who developed an interface and software which allowed a " switched " joystick to be used with the majority of software titles .
This interface became very popular and was sold by W.H. Smiths , Boots , Comet and hundreds of independent computer dealers .
The Advanced Plus 3 was very similar to the Acorn Plus 3 but packaged as an ADFS ROM cartridge for the Plus 1 with a disc drive connector at the head .
This made it possible to connect a 5¼ " floppy disc drive as used by BBC Micro owners or a more common 3½ " drive .
AP5 Provided User Port ( all lines ) , 1 MHz bus and ' Tube ' bus capability , enabling second processor usage .
For the PRES5 , and other similar interfaces , the User Port is usually implemented via a 6522 VIA chip .
The Slogger and Elektuur Turbo Boards were born out of a hack initially devised at Acorn .
By moving the lowest 8 kB of RAM outside of reach of the ULA , the CPU could always access it at 2 MHz .
The tradeoff was that the screen could not be located in that 8 kB.
In practice the operating system ROMs always put the screen into the top 24 kB and as a result this probably only broke compatibility with around 2 % of software .
The Slogger Turbo Board was a professionally fitted upgrade whereas the Elektuur modification was described in an article in Dutch Electronics magazine Elektuur and intended for users to perform at home .
Speeding up the low portion of memory is particularly useful on 6502 derived machines because that processor has a faster addressing mode for the first 256 bytes and so it is common for software to put any variables involved in time critical sections of program into that region .
If Acorn had thought to include this small modification in the original Electron design it is likely the machine would have had a much greater impact as it would have nearly doubled the amount of motion possible in games and saved modes 0–3 ( including the only 16 colour mode ) from being nearly useless due to contended memory timings .
A development of the Turbo Board , the Master RAM Board duplicated the Turbo Board functionality and added a further option of running the micro with 32 kB of shadow RAM in addition to the ordinary 32 kB — giving 64 kB total .
Some clever program counter catches meant that the ordinary system ROMs and any software using the OS calls could function without significant modification , making substantially more memory available for BASIC , View , Viewsheet and almost every other business application .
By providing extra storage this modification also allowed some games and applications intended for the BBC Micro to function on the Electron despite the lack of a native Mode 7.
Applications could not directly address video memory in this mode without modification , so it was incompatible with most games , although there is no inherent reason why a game could not be written to function in shadow mode .
During its decline , Master RAM Boards were added to every Electron in an attempt to increase sales .
Of the capabilities present in the BBC Micro but absent from the Electron , the teletext-style "mode 7 " was particularly conspicuous because of the very low memory usage in that mode ( just less than 1 kB ) and the high number of BBC programs that used it .
Jafa Systems provided a number of solutions to redress this deficiency .
( Note - the Jafa interface did not provide Teletext interface itself , but it did work in conjunction with specific CEEFAX/Teletext/Prestel adaptors from other manufacturers such as Morley )
The most basic solution was a pure software system supplied on a ROM cartridge that drew a low resolution approximation of the mode 7 display in a graphics mode .
Although cheap and effective in enabling use of some software that only used official ROM entry points for text output , this solution proved very slow because the Electron had to be placed into an 80-byte-pitch display to be able to get anywhere near to reproducing mode 7 and the CPU spent a lot of time drawing approximations of mode 7 characters and graphics that in a hardware solution would be achieved without any CPU processing .
It also used up 20 kB of RAM for the graphics display rather than the 1 kB of a hardware mode 7.
The first used the same graphics processor as the BBC Micro in mode 7 — the SAA5050 — but used software to ensure that it was fed with the correct graphics data .
A software ROM would put the machine into an ordinary 40-byte-pitch display .
While the ULA would read the display from memory in the usual fashion , the SAA5050 would listen to the data it was reading and produce a mode 7 interpretation of the same information .
When necessary the hardware would switch between the graphics output being produced by the micro and that being produced by the add-on .
The disadvantage to this system is that while the SAA5050 would expect to be repeatedly fed the same 40 bytes of data for every display scanline of each character row , the ULA would read a different set of 40 bytes for every display scanline in order to produce a full graphics display .
A software ROM worked around this by duplicating the data intended for a mode 7 display in memory .
Although this produced a mode 7 that barely impacted upon CPU performance and gave the same visual quality as the BBC Micro , it remained compatible only with software that used the ROM routines for outputting text and graphics and still used 10 kB of memory for the display .
A second version of the hardware add-on corrected these problems .
By adding a CRTC6845 to the package , a full hardware solution was created that did not reduce CPU performance and only used 1 kB of memory for the display .
A software ROM was still supplied , but this did no more than expand the hardware ROM so that it knew mode 7 now existed and was able to switch into it .
During the latter years , PMS produced a 2nd Processor specifically for the Electron .
This provided an alternative to buying the combination of the P.R.E.S. Advanced Plus 5 and Acorn 6502 2nd Processor .
An unusual variant of the Electron was sold by British Telecom Business Systems as the BT Merlin M2105 Communications Terminal .
This consisted of a de-badged Electron plus a large expansion unit containing 32 kB of RAM , 48 kB of ROM , a Centronics printer port and a modem .
These were used by the Interflora florists network in the UK for over a decade .
The hardware of the BBC Micro was emulated by a single customized ULA chip designed by Acorn in conjunction with Ferranti .
It had feature limitations such as the inability to provide teletext mode and being unable to output more than one channel of sound .
By contrast , the BBC Micro was capable of three-way polyphony ( plus one noise channel ) .
The edge-connector on the rear of the Electron exposed almost all the Bus lines , but not all .
( The BBC Micro , courtesy of all its ports , exposed all lines . )
For Issue 1-4 motherboards , the ULA had an issue similar to those experienced by other socketed CPU's .
Over time , the thermal heating and cooling could cause the ULA to rise slightly out of its socket just enough to cause the machine to start exhibiting 'hanging ' or other startup-failure issues , such as a continuous 'startup beep' .
This was despite a metal cover , and locking-bar mechanism designed to prevent this from occurring .
Pushing down on the metal cover to reseat the ULA was normally sufficient to rectify these issues .
Issue 5 and 6 boards utilized a different epoxy resin covering directly over the ULA , which resolved this issue .
The keyboard included a form of single-key keyword input , similar to that used on the Sinclair Spectrum , via the 'func' key .
However , unlike the Spectrum , the single-keypress keyword-entry was optional , and keywords could be entered manually if preferred .
The ULA controlled memory access and was able to provide 32K × 8 bits of addressable RAM using 4 × 64K × 1-bit RAM chips ( 4164 ) .
Due to needing two accesses to each chip instead of one , and the complications of the video hardware also needing access , reading or writing RAM was much slower than on the BBC Micro .
This meant that although ROM applications ran at the same speed , there was a substantial speed decrease on applications running from RAM.
Like the BBC Micro , the Electron was constrained by limited memory resources .
Of the 32 kB RAM , 3½ kB was allocated to the OS at startup and at least 10 kB was taken up by the display buffer in contiguous display modes .
Due to the timing of interrupts it was possible to disable either the top 100 or bottom 156 lines of the display with palette changes .
Many games took advantage of this , gaining storage by leaving non-graphical data in the disabled area .
Other games would load non-graphical data into the display , leaving it visible as regions of apparently randomly coloured pixels .
Although page flipping was a hardware possibility , the limited memory forced most applications to do all their drawing directly to the visible screen , often resulting in graphical flicker or visible redraw .
A notable exception is Players ' " Joe Blade " series .
Although programs can alter the position of the screen in memory , the non-linear format of the display means that vertical scrolling can only be done in blocks of 8 pixels without further work .
" FireTrack " exploits a division in the way the Electron handles its display — of the seven available graphics modes , two are configured so that the final two of every ten scanlines are blank and are not based on the contents of RAM.
If 16 scanlines of continuous graphical data are written to a character-block-aligned portion of the screen then they will appear as a continuous block in most modes but in the two non-continuous modes they will be displayed as two blocks of eight scanlines , separated in the middle by two blank scanlines .
In order to keep track of its position within the display , the Electron maintains an internal display address counter .
The same counter is used in both the continuous and non-continuous graphics modes and switching modes mid-frame does not cause any adjustment to the counter .
" FireTrack " switches from a non-continuous to a continuous graphics mode part way down the display .
By using the palette to mask the top area of the display and taking care about when it changes mode it can shift the continuous graphics at the bottom of the display down in two pixel increments because the internal display counter is not incremented on blank scanlines during non-continuous graphics modes .
" Exile " turns the Electron 's one channel output into a digital speaker for PCM output .
The speaker can be programmatically switched on or off at any time but is permanently attached to a hardware counter so is normally only able to output a square wave .
But if set to a frequency outside the human audible range then the ear ca n't perceive the square wave , only the difference between the speaker being switched on and off .
This gives the effect of a simple toggle speaker similar to that seen in the 48 kB Sinclair ZX Spectrum .
" Exile " uses this to output 1-bit audio samples .
Aardvark Software 's " Frak ! " and " Zalaga " As part of the copy protection , illegal copies of the games would cause a pseudo-polyphonic rendition of Trumpet Hornpipe , the Captain Pugwash theme tune , to play endlessly rather than loading the game properly ( Pugwash being a pirate ) .
On the Electron version of Frak ! , the tune was the main theme from " Benny Hill " ( Boots Randolph 's " Yakety Sax" ) .
The polyphony was achieved via fast note-switching to achieve the necessary chords .
Although not as well supported by the biggest software publishers as rivals like the Commodore 64 and Sinclair ZX Spectrum , a good range of games were available for the Electron .
The traditional BBC Micro publishers such as Acornsoft , Superior Software and Micro Power offered the widest support .
Notable popular games particularly associated with the Electron include :
There were also many popular games officially converted to the Electron from arcade machines ( including " Crystal Castles " , " Tempest" , " Commando" , " Paperboy " and " Yie Ar Kung-Fu" ) or other home computer systems ( including " Impossible Mission" , " Jet Set Willy" , " The Way of the Exploding Fist" , " Tetris" , " The Last Ninja" , " Barbarian " and " SimCity " ) .
Despite Acorn themselves effectively shelving the Electron in 1985 , games continued to be developed and released by professional software houses until 1991 .
There were around 1,400 games released for the Acorn Electron , several thousand extra public domain titles were released on disc through Public Domain libraries .
Notable enterprises which produced discs of such software are BBC PD , Electron User Group and HeadFirst PD.
Three emulators of the machine exist , ElectrEm for Windows/Linux/OS X , Elkulator for Windows/DOS , ElkJS is a browser based ( Javascript/HTML5 ) Emulator and the Multi-system emulator MESS.
Electron software is predominantly archived in the UEF file format .
The operating system ROM locations 0xFC00-0xFDFF contain the following text , which is different from the 'thanks ' list in the original BBC Model B :
Additionally , the last bytes of both the BASIC ROM and 'Plus 3 Interface ' ADFS v1.0 ROM include the word " Roger" , thought to be a reference to Roger Wilson .
The case was designed by industrial designer Allen Boothroyd of Cambridge Product Design Ltd.
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
An ansible is a fictional machine capable of instantaneous or superluminal communication .
Typically it is depicted as a lunch-box-sized object with some combination of microphone , speaker , keyboard and display .
It can send and receive messages to and from a corresponding device over any distance whatsoever with no delay .
Ansibles occur as plot devices in science fiction literature .
The word "ansible " was coined by Ursula K. Le Guin in her 1966 novel " Rocannon 's World " .
Le Guin states that she derived the name from "answerable , " as the device would allow its users to receive answers to their messages in a reasonable amount of time , even over interstellar distances .
Her award-winning 1974 novel " The Dispossessed " , a book in the Hainish Cycle , tells of the invention of the ansible .
The name of the device has since been borrowed by authors such as Orson Scott Card ,
Vernor Vinge , Elizabeth Moon , Jason Jones , L.A. Graf , and Dan Simmons .
Similar devices are present in the works of numerous others , such as Frank Herbert and Philip Pullman , who called his a "lodestone resonator" .
Anne McCaffrey 's " Crystal Singer " series posited an instantaneous communication device powered by rare " Black Crystal " from the planet Ballybran .
Black Crystals cut from the same mineral deposit could be "tuned " to sympathetically vibrate with each other instantly , even when separated by interstellar distances , allowing instantaneous telephone-like voice and data communication .
Similarly , in Gregory Keyes ' series " The Age of Unreason" , " aetherschreibers " use two halves of a single " chime " to communicate , aided by scientific alchemy .
While the speed of communication is important , so is the fact that the messages cannot be overheard except by listeners with a piece of the same original crystal .
Stephen R. Donaldson , in his Gap cycle , proposed a similar system , " Symbiotic Crystalline Resonance Transmission" , clearly ansible-type technology but very difficult to produce and limited to text messages .
Some hard science fiction stories use small ( possibly nano-sized ) paired wormholes dedicated to communication by means of a laser which traverses the wormhole .
In Robert L. Forward 's novel " Timemaster" , the wormhole is a living organism resembling a fourth-dimensional sea anemone , " stretched " to cover the distance between a spaceship and a satellite on the home planet .
Charles Stross 's books " Singularity Sky " and " Iron Sunrise " make use of " causal channels " which use entangled particles for instantaneous two-way communication .
The technique has drawbacks in that the entangled particles are expendable and the use of faster-than-light travel destroys the entanglement , so that one end of the channel must be transported below light speed .
This makes them expensive and limits their usefulness somewhat .
In Richard K. Morgan 's Takeshi Kovacs novels human colonies on distant planets maintain contact with earth and each other via "hyperspatial needlecast" , a technology which moves information " ...so close to instantaneously that scientists are still arguing about the terminology ..." .
One ansible-like device which predates Le Guin 's is the " Dirac communicator " that features in several of the works of James Blish , notably his 1954 short story " Beep" .
As alluded to in the title , any active device received the sum of all transmitted messages in universal space-time , in a single pulse , so that demultiplexing yielded information about the past , present , and future .
In the story With Folded Hands ( 1947 ) , by Jack Williamson , instant communication and power transfer through interstellar space is possible with something referred to as "rhodomagnetic waves " .
Isaac Asimov solved the same communication problem with the "hyper-wave relay " in the " Foundation " series .
Larry Niven later used the same term for the plot device used within his Known Space series of novels and short stories , notably in the " Ringworld " and associated Fleet of Worlds series .
In Ivan Yefremov 's 1957 novel " Andromeda" , a device for instant transfer of information and matter is made real by using "bipolar mathematics " to explore use of anti-gravitational shadow vectors through a zero field and the antispace , which enables them to make contact with the planet of Epsilon Tucanae .
Le Guin 's ansible was said to communicate "instantaneously" , but other authors have adopted the name for devices capable only of finite-speed communication , although still faster than light .
The " subspace radio" , best known today from Star Trek and named for the method used in the series for achieving faster-than-light travel , was the most commonly used name for such a faster-than-light communicator in the science fiction of the 1930s to the 1950s .
In all the Stargate television series , characters are able to communicate instantaneously over long distances by transferring their consciousness into another person or being anywhere in the universe using " Ancient communication stones " .
It is not known how these stones operate , but the technology explained in the show usually revolves around wormholes for instant teleportation , faster-than-light , space-warping travel , and sometimes around quantum multiverses .
Jonathan Rosenberg , author/artist of the humorous science fiction webcomic " Scenes from a Multiverse" , references an ansible powered by a quantum-entangled ferret in one of the comics .
In Avatar continuity , superluminal communication via a subtle control over the state of entangled particles is possible , but for practical purposes extremely slow and expensive : at a transmission rate of three bits of information per hour and a cost of $ 7,500 per bit , it is used for only the highest priority messages .
In the Doctor Who episode Nightmare in Silver a character references a broken ansible communicator .
In " The Word for World Is Forest" , Le Guin explains that in order for communication to work with any pair of ansibles , at least one "must be on a large-mass body , the other can be anywhere in the cosmos . "
In " The Left Hand of Darkness" , the ansible
Unlike McCaffrey 's black crystal transceivers , Le Guin 's ansibles are not mated pairs : it is possible for an ansible 's coordinates to be set to any known location of a receiving ansible .
Moreover , the ansibles Le Guin uses in her stories apparently have a very limited bandwidth which only allows for at most a few hundred characters of text to be communicated in any transaction of a dialog session .
Instead of a microphone and speaker , Le Guin 's ansibles are attached to a keyboard and small display to perform text messaging .
Orson Scott Card 's " Ender 's Game " series uses the ansible as a plot device .
" The official name is Philotic Parallax Instantaneous Communicator , " explains Colonel Graff in " Ender 's Game " , " but somebody dredged the name "ansible " out of an old book somewhere . "
Card 's description of the ansible 's functions in " Xenocide " involve a fictional subatomic particle , the philote .
In the " Enderverse" , the two quarks inside a pi meson can be separated by an arbitrary distance while remaining connected by "philotic rays " .
This concept is similar to quantum teleportation due to entanglement .
Also , in the real world , quark confinement prevents quarks from being separated by more than microscopic distances .
The ansible is also featured in the video game " Advent Rising" , for which Card helped write the story .
There is a brief reference to the ansible in " Winning Colors " .
The ansible itself is a major plot element , nearly a MacGuffin in Moon 's Vatta 's War series .
Much of the story line revolves around various parties attacking or repairing ansibles , and around the internal politics of ISC ( InterStellar Communications ) , which holds a monopoly on the ansible technology .
There is no currently known way to build an ansible .
The theory of special relativity predicts that any such device would allow communication from the future to the past , which raises problems of causality , unless the device used general relativistic curved spacetimes as an integral part .
Quantum nonlocality is often proposed as a mechanism for superluminal communication .
A 2008 quantum physics experiment performed in Geneva , Switzerland has determined that in any hypothetical nonlocal hidden-variables theory the speed of the "quantum non-local connection " would have to be at least 10,000 times the speed of light .
Practical applications are shown to be impossible by the no-cloning theorem , and the fact that quantum field theories preserve causality , so that quantum correlations cannot be used to transfer information .
Time reports that the Delft Institute of Technology in The Netherlands has demonstrated the principle by isolating target entangled electrons inside two supercooled diamonds placed 10 meters apart , creating what one of the physicists described as “miniprisons ” for them .
They then maniupulated their spin rate and determined that the behavior of one indeed continued to determine the spin of the other , and vice versa , even at that distance .
See time travel and faster-than-light for more discussion of these issues .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
In mathematics , the axiom of regularity ( also known as the axiom of foundation ) is an axiom of Zermelo– Fraenkel set theory that states that every non-empty set " A" contains an element that is disjoint from " A" .
The axiom implies that no set is an element of itself , and that there is no infinite sequence ( "an " ) such that "ai+1 " is an element of "ai " for all "i" .
With the axiom of dependent choice ( which is a weakened form of the axiom of choice ) , this result can be reversed : if there are no such infinite sequences , then the axiom of regularity is true .
Hence , the axiom of regularity is equivalent , given the axiom of dependent choice , to the alternative axiom that there are no downward infinite membership chains .
The axiom of regularity was introduced by ; it was adopted in a formulation closer to the one found in contemporary textbooks by .
Virtually all results in the branches of mathematics based on set theory hold even in the absence of regularity ; see chapter 3 of .
However , regularity makes some properties of ordinals easier to prove ; and it not only allows induction to be done on well-ordered sets but also on proper classes that are well-founded relational structures such as the lexicographical ordering on formula_2
Given the other axioms of Zermelo– Fraenkel set theory , the axiom of regularity is equivalent to the axiom of induction .
The axiom of induction tends to be used in place of the axiom of regularity in intuitionistic theories (ones that do not accept the law of the excluded middle ) , where the two axioms are not equivalent .
In addition to omitting the axiom of regularity , non-standard set theories have indeed postulated the existence of sets that are elements of themselves .
Let " A" be a set , and apply the axiom of regularity to {" A" } , which is a set by the axiom of pairing .
We see that there must be an element of {" A" } which is disjoint from {" A" } .
Since the only element of {" A" } is " A" , it must be that " A" is disjoint from {" A" } .
So , since " A" ∈ {" A" } , we cannot have " A" ∈ " A" ( by the definition of disjoint ) .
Suppose , to the contrary , that there is a function , " f" , on the natural numbers with " f" ( " n " +1 ) an element of " f" ( " n " ) for each " n" .
Define " S" = { "f" ( " n " ) : " n " a natural number} , the range of " f" , which can be seen to be a set from the axiom schema of replacement .
Applying the axiom of regularity to " S" , let " B" be an element of " S" which is disjoint from " S" .
By the definition of " S" , " B" must be " f" ("k" ) for some natural number "k" .
However , we are given that " f" ("k" ) contains " f" ("k"+1 ) which is also an element of " S" .
So " f" ("k"+1 ) is in the intersection of " f" ("k" ) and " S" .
This contradicts the fact that they are disjoint sets .
Since our supposition led to a contradiction , there must not be any such function , " f" .
The nonexistence of a set containing itself can be seen as a special case where the sequence is infinite and constant .
Notice that this argument only applies to functions " f " that can be represented as sets as opposed to undefinable classes .
The hereditarily finite sets , Vω , satisfy the axiom of regularity ( and all other axioms of ZFC except the axiom of infinity ) .
So if one forms a non-trivial ultrapower of Vω , then it will also satisfy the axiom of regularity .
The resulting model will contain elements , called non-standard natural numbers , that satisfy the definition of natural numbers in that model but are not really natural numbers .
They are fake natural numbers which are "larger " than any actual natural number .
This model will contain infinite descending sequences of elements .
For example , suppose " n " is a non-standard natural number , then formula_3 and formula_4 , and so on .
This is an unending descending sequence of elements .
But this sequence is not definable in the model and thus not a set .
So no contradiction to regularity can be proved .
The axiom of regularity enables defining the ordered pair ( " a" ,"b" ) as { " a" , {" a" ,"b" }} .
This definition eliminates one pair of braces from the canonical Kuratowski definition ( " a" ,"b" ) = .
This was actually the original form of von Neumann 's axiomatization .
For every two sets , only one can be an element of the other .
Then apply the axiom of regularity to the set { " X" ," Y" } .
We see there must be an element of { " X" ," Y" } which is also disjoint from it .
By the definition of disjoint then , we must have either " Y " is not an element of " X " or vice versa .
The axiom of dependent choice and no infinite descending sequence of sets implies regularity .
Let the non-empty set " S" be a counter-example to the axiom of regularity ; that is , every element of " S" has a non-empty intersection with " S" .
We define a binary relation " R" on " S" by formula_6 , which is entire by assumption .
Thus , by the axiom of dependent choice , there is some sequence ( "an " ) in " S" satisfying "anRan+1 " for all " n " in N. As this is an infinite descending chain , we arrive at a contradiction and so , no such " S" exists .
Regularity and the rest of ZF( C ) axioms .
Regularity was shown to be relatively consistent with the rest of ZF by , meaning that if ZF without regularity is consistent , then ZF ( with regularity ) is also consistent .
For his proof in modern notation see for instance .
The axiom of regularity was also shown to be independent from the other axioms of ZF( C) , assuming they are consistent .
The result was announced by Paul Bernays in 1941 , although he did not publish a proof until 1954 .
The proof involves ( and led to the study of ) Rieger-Bernays permutation models ( or method ) , which were used for other proofs of independence for non-well-founded systems ( and ) .
Naive set theory ( the axiom schema of unrestricted comprehension and the axiom of extensionality ) is inconsistent due to Russell 's paradox .
Set theorists have avoided that contradiction by replacing the axiom schema of comprehension with the much weaker axiom schema of separation .
So some of the power of comprehension was added back via the other existence axioms of ZF set theory ( pairing , union , powerset , replacement , and infinity ) which may be regarded as special cases of comprehension .
So far , these axioms do not seem to lead to any contradiction .
Subsequently , the axiom of choice and the axiom of regularity were added to exclude models with some undesirable properties .
These two axioms are known to be relatively consistent .
In the presence of the axiom schema of separation , Russell 's paradox becomes a proof that there is no set of all sets .
The axiom of regularity ( with the axiom of pairing ) also prohibits such a universal set , however this prohibition is redundant when added to the rest of ZF.
If the ZF axioms without regularity were already inconsistent , then adding regularity would not make them consistent .
The existence of Quine atoms ( sets that satisfy the formula equation " x " = { " x"} , i .e . have themselves as their only elements ) is consistent with the theory obtained by removing the axiom of regularity from ZFC. Various non-wellfounded set theories allow " safe " circular sets , such as Quine atoms , without becoming inconsistent by means of Russell 's paradox .
In ZF it can be proven that the class formula_7 ( see cumulative hierarchy ) is equal to the class of all sets .
This statement is even equivalent to the axiom of regularity ( if we work in ZF with this axiom omitted ) .
From any model which does not satisfy axiom of regularity , a model which satisfies it can be constructed by taking only sets in formula_7 .
" The truth is that there is only one satisfactory way of avoiding the paradoxes : namely , the use of some form of the " theory of types " .
That was at the basis of both Russell 's and Zermelo 's intuitions .
Indeed the best way to regard Zermelo 's theory is as a simplification and extension of Russell 's .
( We mean Russell 's " simple " theory of types , of course . )
The simplification was to make the types " cumulative" .
Thus mixing of types is easier and annoying repetitions are avoided .
Once the later types are allowed to accumulate the earlier ones , we can then easily imagine "extending " the types into the transfinite—just how far we want to go must necessarily be left open .
Now Russell made his types "explicit " in his notation and Zermelo left them "implicit " . "
In the same paper , Scott shows that an axiomatic system based on the inherent properties of the cumulative hierarchy turns out to be equivalent to ZF , including regularity .
The concept of well-foundedness and rank of a set were both introduced by Dmitry Mirimanoff ( 1917 ) cf . and .
Mirimanoff called a set " x " "regular " ( French : "ordinaire " ) if every descending chain " x " ∋ "x1 " ∋ "x2 " ∋ ... is finite .
Mirimanoff however did not consider his notion of regularity ( and well-foundedness ) as an axiom to be observed by all sets ; in later papers Mirimanoff also explored what are now called non-well-founded sets ( "extraordinaire " in Mirimanoff 's terminology ) .
According to Adam Rieger , describes non-well-founded sets as " superfluous " ( on p . 404 in van Heijenoort 's translation ) and in the same publication von Neumann gives an axiom ( p . 412 in translation ) which excludes some , but not all , non-well-founded sets .
In a subsequent publication , gave the following axiom ( rendered in modern notation by A. Rieger ) :
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
AppleTalk is a proprietary suite of networking protocols developed by Apple Inc. for their Macintosh computers .
AppleTalk included a number of features that allowed local area networks to be connected with no prior setup or the need for a centralized router or server of any sort .
Connecting together AppleTalk equipped systems would automatically assign addresses , update the distributed namespace , and configure any required inter-networking routing .
AppleTalk was released for the original Macintosh in 1985 , and was the primary protocol used by Apple devices through the 1980s and 90s .
Versions were also released for the IBM PC and compatibles , and the Apple IIGS.
AppleTalk support was also available in most networked printers (especially laser printers ) , some file servers and a number of routers .
The rise of TCP/IP during the 1990s led to a re-implementation of most of these types of support on that protocol , and AppleTalk became unsupported as of the release of Mac OS X v10.6 in 2009 .
Many of Apple Talk 's more advanced auto-configuration features have since been introduced in Bonjour , while Universal Plug and Play serves similar needs .
After the release of the Apple Lisa computer in January 1983 , Apple invested considerable effort in the development of a local area networking ( LAN ) system for the machines .
Known as AppleNet , it was based on the seminal Xerox XNS protocol stack but running on a custom 1 Mbit/s coaxial cable system rather than Xerox 's 4 Mbit/s Ethernet .
AppleNet was announced early in 1983 with a fall introduction at the target price of $ 500 for plug-in AppleNet cards for the Lisa and the Apple II .
At that time , early LAN systems were just coming to market , including Ethernet , Token Ring and ARCNET.
This was a topic of major commercial effort at the time , dominating shows like the National Computer Conference (NCC ) in Anaheim in May 1983 .
All of the systems were jockeying for position in the market , but even at this time Ethernet 's widespread acceptance suggested it was to become a "de facto " standard .
It was at this show that Steve Jobs asked Gursharan Sidhu a seemingly innocuous question , " Why has networking not caught on ? "
Four months later , in October , AppleNet was cancelled .
At the time , they announced that " Apple realized that it 's not in the business to create a networking system .
We built and used AppleNet in-house , but we realized that if we had shipped it , we would have seen new standards coming up . "
In January , Jobs announced that they would instead be supporting IBM 's Token Ring , which he expected to come out in a "few months " .
Through this period , Apple was deep in development of the Macintosh computer .
During development , engineers had made the decision to use the Zilog 8530 serial controller chip (SCC ) instead of the lower cost and more common UART to provide serial port connections .
The SCC cost about $ 5 more than a UART , but offered much higher speeds up to 250 kilobytes per second ( or higher with additional hardware ) and internally supported a number of basic networking-like protocols like IBM 's Bisync .
The SCC was chosen because it would allow multiple devices to be attached to the port .
Peripherals equipped with similar SCC 's could communicate using the built-in protocols , interleaving their data with other peripherals on the same bus .
This would eliminate the need for more ports on the back of the machine , and allowed for the elimination of expansion slots for supporting more complex devices .
The initial concept was known as AppleBus , envisioning a system controlled by the host Macintosh polling "dumb " devices in a fashion similar to the modern Universal Serial Bus .
The Macintosh team had already begun work on what would become the LaserWriter , and had considered a number of other options of how to share these expensive machines and other resources .
A series of memos from Bob Belleville clarified these concepts , outlining the Mac , LaserWriter and a file server system which would become Macintosh Office .
By late 1983 it was clear that IBM 's Token Ring would not be ready in time for the launch of the Mac , and might miss the launch of these other products as well .
In the end , Token Ring would not ship until October 1985 .
Jobs ' earlier question to Sidhu had already sparked a number of ideas .
When AppleNet was cancelled in October , Sidhu led an effort to develop a new networking system based on the AppleBus hardware .
This new system would not have to conform to any existing preconceptions , and was designed to be worthy of the Mac - a system that was user-installable , had zero-configuration , and no fixed network addresses - in short , a true plug-and-play network .
Considerable effort was needed , but by the time the Mac was released , the basic concepts had been outlined , and some of the low-level protocols were on their way to completion .
Sidhu mentioned the work to Belleville only two hours after the Mac was announced .
The "new " AppleBus was announced in early 1984 , allowing direct connection from the Mac or Lisa through a small box that plugged into the serial port and connected via cables to the next computer upstream and downstream .
Adaptors for Apple II and Apple III were also announced .
Apple also announced that AppleBus networks could be attached to , and would appear to be a single node within , a Token Ring system .
Details of how this would work were sketchy .
When the newly christened AppleTalk shipped in early 1985 , it included a number of compromises .
These included a speed of 230.4 kbit/s , 1000 feet maximum distance , and only 32 nodes per LAN.
Since the basic hardware was built into the Mac , adding nodes only cost about $ 50 for the adaptor box .
In comparison , Ethernet or Token Ring cards cost hundreds or thousands of dollars .
The entire networking stack required only about 6 kB of RAM.
The system was designed for future expansion ; the addressing system allowed for expansion to 255 nodes in a LAN ( although only 32 could be used at that time ) , and by using "bridges " ( which came to be known as "routers " , although technically not the same ) one could interconnect LANs into larger collections .
" Zones " allowed devices to be addressed within a bridge-connected internet .
Additionally , AppleTalk was designed from the start to allow use with any potential underlying physical link .
The relatively slow speed of AppleTalk allowed further reductions in cost .
Instead of using RS-422 's balanced transmit and receive circuits , the AppleTalk Personal Network cabling used a single common electrical ground , which limited speeds to about 500 kbit/s , but allowed one conductor to be removed .
This meant that common three-conductor cables could be used for wiring .
Additionally , the adaptors were designed to be " self-terminating" , meaning that nodes at the end of the network could simply leave their last connector unconnected .
There was no need for the wires to be connected back together into a loop , nor the need for hubs or other devices .
To join an existing network , one simply plugged the adaptor into the computer and connected a cable to the nearest machine with a free port .
AppleTalk was so easy to use that ad-hoc networks tended to appear whenever multiple Macs were in the same room .
Apple would later use this in an advertisement showing a network being created between two seats in an airplane .
A thriving 3rd party market for AppleTalk devices developed over the next few years .
One particularly notable example was an alternate adaptor designed by BMUG and commercialized by Farallon as PhoneNet in 1987 .
This was essentially a replacement for Apple 's connector that had conventional phone jacks instead of Apple 's round connectors .
PhoneNet allowed AppleTalk networks to be connected together using normal telephone wires , and with very little extra work , could run analog phones and AppleTalk on a single four-conductor phone cable .
Other companies took advantage of the SCC 's ability to read external clocks in order to support higher transmission speeds , up to 1 Mbit/s .
In these systems the external adaptor also included its own clock , and used that to signal the SCC 's clock input pins .
The best known such system was Centram 's FlashTalk , which ran at 768 kbit/s , and was intended to be used with their TOPS networking system .
A similar solution was the 850 kbit/s DaynaTalk , which used a separate box that plugged in between the computer and a normal LocalTalk/PhoneNet box .
Dayna also offered a PC expansion card that ran up to 1.7 Mbit/s when talking to other Dayna PC cards .
Several other systems also existed with even higher performance , but these often required special cabling that was incompatible with LocalTalk/PhoneNet , and also required patches to the networking stack that often caused problems .
By 1987 Ethernet was clearly winning the standards battle over Token Ring , and in the middle of that year Apple introduced EtherTalk 1.0 for the newly released Macintosh II computer .
The package included both a NuBus card with Ethernet ports and a new Network control panel that allowed the user to select which physical connection to use for networking ( from " Built-in " or "Ether Talk " ) .
The release 's new networking stack also expanded the system to allow a full 255 nodes per LAN.
With its release , AppleTalk Personal Network was renamed LocalTalk .
Token Ring would eventually be supported with the similar TokenTalk product , which used the same Network control panel and underlying software .
Many 3rd party companies would introduce compatible Ethernet and Token Ring cards that used these same drivers .
The appearance of EtherTalk also led to a problem - networks with new and old Macs needed some way to communicate between each other .
This could be as simple as a network of Ethernet Mac II 's trying to talk to a LaserWriter .
Apple had considered the problem , and AppleTalk included the possibility for a low-cost LocalTalk-to-Ethernet bridge , but they felt it would be a low-volume product and left it to 3rd parties .
A number of companies responded , both existing communications vendors like Hayes and Cisco Systems , as well as newly formed companies like Kinetics .
Contrary to Apple 's belief these would be low-volume , by the end of 1987 , 130,000 such systems were in use .
AppleTalk was at that time the most used networking system in the world , with over three times the installations of any other vendor .
1987 also marked the introduction of the AppleShare product , a dedicated file server that ran on any Mac with 512 kB of RAM or more .
A common AppleShare machine was the Mac Plus with an external SCSI hard drive .
AppleShare was the # 3 network operating system in the late 1980s , behind Novell NetWare and Microsoft MS-NET.
AppleShare was effectively the replacement for the failed Macintosh Office efforts , which had been based on a dedicated file server device .
A significant re-design was released in 1989 as AppleTalk Phase II .
In many ways , Phase II can be considered an effort to make the earlier version ( never called Phase I ) more generic .
LANs could now support more than 255 nodes , and zones were no longer associated with physical networks , but were entirely virtual constructs used simply to organize nodes .
For instance , one could now make a " Printers " zone that would list all the printers in an organization , or one might want to place that same device in the " 2nd Floor " zone to indicate its physical location .
Phase II also included changes to the underlying inter-networking protocols to make them less " chatty" , which had previously been a serious problem on networks that bridged over wide-area networks .
By this point Apple had a wide variety of communications products under development , and many of these were announced along with AppleTalk Phase II .
These included updates to EtherTalk and TokenTalk , AppleTalk software and LocalTalk hardware for the IBM PC , EtherTalk for Apple 's A/UX operating system allowing it to use LaserPrinters and other network resources , and the Mac X.25 and MacX products .
Ethernet had become almost universal by 1990 , and it was time to build Ethernet into Macs direct from the factory .
However , the physical wiring used by these networks was not yet completely standardized .
Apple solved this problem using a single port on the back of the computer into which the user could plug an adaptor for any given cabling system .
This FriendlyNet system was based on the industry-standard Attachment Unit Interface or AUI , but deliberately chose a non-standard connector that was smaller and easier to use , which they called " Apple AUI" , or AAUI.
FriendlyNet was first introduced on the Quadra 700 and Quadra 900 computers , and used across much of the Mac line for some time .
As with LocalTalk , a number of 3rd party FriendlyNet adaptors quickly appeared .
As 10-BASE-T became the de facto cabling system for Ethernet , second-generation Power Macintosh machines added a 10-BASE-T port in addition to the AAUI , and eventually dropped AAUI on Macs with the New World ROM , and 10-BASE-T was then universal .
In 1988 Apple had released MacTCP , a system that allowed the Mac to support TCP/IP on machines with suitable Ethernet hardware .
However , this left many universities with the problem of supporting IP on their many LocalTalk-equipped Macs .
Stanford University pioneered development of MacIP , which allowed IP packets to be routed over LocalTalk networks with the support of a suitable "gateway " machine .
These were initially custom devices , but it was soon common to include MacIP support in LocalTalk-to-Ethernet bridges .
MacTCP would now become a standard part of the Mac OS until 1994 , by which time it also supported SNMP and PPP.
For some time in the early 1990s , the Mac was a primary client on the rapidly expanding Internet .
Among the better known programs in wide use were Fetch , Eudora , eXodus , NewsWatcher and the NCSA packages , especially NCSA Mosaic and its offspring , Netscape Navigator .
Additionally , a number of server products appeared that allowed the Mac to host Internet content .
Through this period , Macs had about 2 to 3 times as many clients connected to the Internet as any other platform , despite the relatively small overall marketshare .
As the world quickly moved to IP for both LAN and WAN uses , Apple was faced with maintaining two increasingly outdated code bases on an ever-wider group of machines as well as the introduction of the PowerPC based machines .
This led to the Open Transport efforts , which re-implemented both MacTCP and AppleTalk on an entirely new code base adapted from the Unix standard STREAMS.
Early versions had problems and did not become stable for some time .
By that point , Apple was deep in their ultimately doomed Copland efforts .
With the purchase of NeXT and subsequent development of Mac OS X , AppleTalk was strictly a legacy system .
Support was added to OS X in order to provide support for the large number of existing AppleTalk devices , notably laser printers and file shares , but alternate connection solutions common in this era , notably USB for printers , limited their demand .
As Apple abandoned many of these product categories , and all new systems were based on IP , AppleTalk became less and less common .
AppleTalk support was finally removed from the MacOS in Mac OS X v10.6 in 2009 .
However , the loss of AppleTalk did not reduce the desire for networking solutions that combined its ease-of-use with IP routing .
Apple has led development of many such efforts , from the introduction of the AirPort router to the development of the Zero configuration networking system and their implementation of it , Bonjour .
The AppleTalk design rigorously followed the OSI model of protocol layering .
Unlike most of the early LAN systems , AppleTalk was not built using the archetypal Xerox XNS system .
The intended target was not Ethernet , and it did not have 48-bit addresses to route .
Nevertheless , many portions of the AppleTalk system have direct analogs in XNS.
One key differentiation for AppleTalk was it contained two protocols aimed at making the system completely self-configuring .
The " Apple Talk address resolution protocol " ( "AARP" ) allowed AppleTalk hosts to automatically generate their own network addresses , and the " Name Binding Protocol " ( "NBP" ) was a dynamic system for mapping network addresses to user-readable names .
Although systems similar to AARP existed in other systems , Banyan VINES for instance , nothing like NBP has existed until recently .
Both AARP and NBP had defined ways to allow " controller " devices to override the default mechanisms .
The concept was to allow routers to provide the information or "hardwire " the system to known addresses and names .
On larger networks where AARP could cause problems as new nodes searched for free addresses , the addition of a router could reduce " chattiness . "
Together AARP and NBP made AppleTalk an easy-to-use networking system .
New machines were added to the network by plugging them and optionally giving them a name .
The NBP lists were examined and displayed by a program known as the " Chooser " which would display a list of machines on the local network , divided into classes such as file-servers and printers .
This consisted of a two-byte network number , a one-byte node number , and a one-byte socket number .
Of these , only the network number required any configuration , being obtained from a router .
Each node dynamically chose its own node number , according to a protocol (originally the LocalTalk Link Access Protocol LLAP and later the AppleTalk Address Resolution Protocol , AARP ) which handled contention between different nodes accidentally choosing the same number .
For socket numbers , a few well-known numbers were reserved for special purposes specific to the AppleTalk protocol itself .
Apart from these , all application-level protocols were expected to use dynamically-assigned socket numbers at both the client and server end .
Because of this dynamism , users could not be expected to access services by specifying their address .
Instead , all services had "names " which , being chosen by humans , could be expected to be meaningful to users , and also could be sufficiently long enough to minimize the chance of conflicts .
As NBP names translated to an address , which included a socket number as well as a node number , a name in AppleTalk mapped directly to a " service " being provided by a machine , which was entirely separate from the name of the machine itself .
Thus , services could be moved to a different machine and , so long as they kept the same service name , there was no need for users to do anything different in order to continue accessing the service .
And the same machine could host any number of instances of services of the same type , without any network connection conflicts .
Contrast this with " A records " in the DNS , where a name translates to a machine 's address , not including the port number that might be providing a service .
Thus , if people are accustomed to using a particular machine name to access a particular service , their access will break when the service is moved to a different machine .
This can be mitigated somewhat by insistence on using "CNAME records " indicating service rather than actual machine names to refer to the service , but there is no way of guaranteeing that users will follow such a convention .
Some newer protocols , such as Kerberos and Active Directory use DNS SRV records to identify services by name , which is much closer to the AppleTalk model .
AARP resolves AppleTalk addresses to link layer , usually MAC , addresses .
When powered on , an AppleTalk machine broadcasts an "AARP probe packet " asking for a network address , intending to hear back from controllers such as routers .
If no address is provided , one is picked at random from the "base subnet" , 0. It then broadcasts another packet saying " I am selecting this address " , and then waits to see if anyone else on the network complains .
If another machine has that address , it will pick another address , and keep trying until it finds a free one .
On a network with many machines it may take several tries before a free address is found , so for performance purposes the successful address is "written down " in NVRAM and used as the default address in the future .
This means that in most real-world setups where machines are added a few at a time , only one or two tries are needed before the address effectively become constant .
This was a comparatively late addition to the AppleTalk protocol suite , done when it became clear that a TCP-style reliable connection-oriented transport was needed .
The Apple Filing Protocol ( AFP) , formerly AppleTalk Filing Protocol , is the protocol for communicating with AppleShare file servers .
Built on top of AppleTalk Session Protocol ( for legacy AFP over DDP ) or the Data Stream Interface ( for AFP over TCP) , it provides services for authenticating users ( extensible to different authentication methods including two-way random-number exchange ) and for performing operations specific to the Macintosh HFS filesystem .
AFP is still in use in Mac OS X , even though most other AppleTalk protocols have been deprecated .
ASP was an intermediate protocol , built on top of ATP , which in turn was the foundation of AFP.
It provided basic services for requesting responses to arbitrary " commands " and performing out-of-band status queries .
It also allowed the server to send asynchronous "attention " messages to the client .
ATP was the original reliable transport-level protocol for Apple Talk , built on top of DDP.
At the time it was being developed , a full , reliable connection-oriented protocol like TCP was considered to be too expensive to implement for most of the intended uses of Apple Talk .
Thus , ATP was a simple request/response exchange , with no need to set up or tear down connections .
An ATP "request " packet could be answered by up to eight "response " packets .
The requestor then sent an "acknowledgement " packet containing a bit mask indicating which of the response packets it received , so the responder could retransmit the remainder .
ATP could operate in either "at-least-once " mode or "exactly-once " mode .
Exactly-once mode was essential for operations which were not idempotent ; in this mode , the responder kept a copy of the response buffers in memory until successful receipt of a "release " packet from the requestor , or until a timeout elapsed .
This way , it could respond to duplicate requests with the same transaction ID by resending the same response data , without performing the actual operation again . **
It provided a datagram service with no guarantees of delivery .
All application-level protocols , including the infrastructure protocols NBP , RTMP and ZIP , were built on top of DDP.
Apple Talk 's DDP corresponds closely to the Network layer of the Open Systems Interconnection ( OSI) communication model .
NBP was a dynamic , distributed system for managing AppleTalk names .
When a service started up on a machine , it registered a name for itself as chosen by a human administrator .
At this point , NBP provided a system for checking that no other machine had already registered the same name .
Later , when a client wanted to access that service , it used NBP to query machines to find that service .
NBP provided browseability ( "what are the names of all the services available ? " )
as well as the ability to find a service with a particular name .
Names were human readable , containing spaces , upper and lower case letters , and including support for searching .
AEP ( Apple Talk Echo Protocol ) is a transport layer protocol designed to test the reachability of network nodes .
AEP generates packets to be sent to the network node and is identified in the Type field of a packet as an AEP packet .
The packet is first passed to the source DDP.
After it is identified as an AEP packet , it is forwarded to the node where the packet is examined by the DDP at the destination .
After the packet is identified as an AEP packet , the packet is then copied and a field in the packet is altered to create an AEP reply packet , and is then returned to the source node .
PAP was the standard way of communicating with PostScript printers .
When a PAP connection was opened , each end sent the other an ATP request which basically meant " send me more data" .
The client 's response to the server was to send a block of PostScript code , while the server could respond with any diagnostic messages that might be generated as a result , after which another " send-more-data " request was sent .
This use of ATP provided automatic flow control ; each end could only send data to the other end if there was an outstanding ATP request to respond to .
PAP also provided for out-of-band status queries , handled by separate ATP transactions .
Even while it was busy servicing a print job from one client , a PAP server could continue to respond to status requests from any number of other clients .
This allowed other Macintoshes on the LAN that were waiting to print to display status messages indicating that the printer was busy , and what the job was that it was busy with .
RTMP was the protocol by which routers kept each other informed about the topology of the network .
This was the only part of AppleTalk that required periodic unsolicited broadcasts : every 10 seconds , each router had to send out a list of all the network numbers it knew about and how far away it thought they were .
ZIP was the protocol by which AppleTalk network numbers were associated with zone names .
A "zone " was a subdivision of the network that made sense to humans ( for example , " Accounting Department " ) ; but while a network number had to be assigned to a topologically-contiguous section of the network , a zone could include several different discontiguous portions of the network .
The initial default hardware implementation for AppleTalk was a high-speed serial protocol known as " LocalTalk " that used the Macintosh 's built-in RS-422 ports at 230.4 kbit/s .
LocalTalk used a splitter box in the RS-422 port to provide an upstream and downstream cable from a single port .
The topology was a bus : cables were daisy-chained from each connected machine to the next , up to the maximum of 32 permitted on any LocalTalk segment .
The system was slow by today 's standards , but at the time the additional cost and complexity of networking on PC machines was such that it was common that Macs were the only networked personal computers in an office .
Other larger computers , such as UNIX or VAX workstations , would commonly be networked via Ethernet .
One common replacement for LocalTalk was " PhoneNet" , a 3rd party solution ( from a company called Farallon , now called Netopia ) that also used the RS-422 port and was indistinguishable from LocalTalk as far as Apple 's LocalTalk port drivers were concerned , but ran over the two unused wires in standard four-wire phone cabling .
PhoneNet was considerably less expensive to install and maintain .
Ethernet and Token Ring was also supported , known as "Ether Talk " and " TokenTalk " respectively .
EtherTalk in particular gradually became the dominant implementation method for AppleTalk as Ethernet became generally popular in the PC industry throughout the 1990s .
Besides AppleTalk and TCP/IP , any Ethernet network could also simultaneously carry other protocols such as DECnet , NetBEUI , and IPX .
When AppleTalk was first introduced , the dominant office computing platform was the PC compatible running MS-DOS.
Apple introduced the AppleTalk PC Card in early 1987 , allowing PCs to join AppleTalk networks and print to LaserWriter printers .
A year later AppleShare PC was released , allowing PCs to access AppleShare file servers .
The " TOPS Teleconnector " MS-DOS networking system over AppleTalk system enabled MS-DOS PCs to communicate over AppleTalk network hardware ; it comprised an AppleTalk interface card for the PC and a suite of networking software allowing such functions as file , drive and printer sharing .
As well as allowing the construction of a PC-only AppleTalk network , it allowed communication between PCs and Macs with TOPS software installed .
( Macs without TOPS installed could use the same network but only to communicate with other Apple machines . )
The Mac TOPS software did not match the quality of Apple 's own either in ease of use or in robustness and freedom from crashes , but the DOS software was relatively simple to use in DOS terms , and was robust .
The BSD and Linux operating systems support AppleTalk through an open source project called Netatalk , which implements the complete protocol suite and allows them to both act as native file or print servers for Macintosh computers , and print to LocalTalk printers over the network .
The Windows Server operating systems supported AppleTalk starting with Windows NT and ending after Windows Server 2003 .
Miramar included AppleTalk in its PC MacLAN product which was discontinued by CA in 2007 .
GroupLogic continues to bundle its AppleTalk protocol with its ExtremeZ-IP server software for Macintosh-Windows integration which supports Windows 2008 Server and Windows Vista as well prior versions .
HELIOS Software GmbH offers a proprietary implementation of the AppleTalk protocol stack , as part of their HELIOS UB2 server .
This is essentially a File and Print Server suite that runs on a whole range of different platforms .
In addition , Columbia University released the Columbia AppleTalk Package ( CAP ) which implemented the protocol suite for various Unix flavors including Ultrix , SunOS , *BSD and IRIX .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
The Ark of the Covenant ( " ʾĀrôn Habbərît" , modern pron .
" Aron Habrit " ) , also known as the Ark of the Testimony , is a chest described in the Book of Exodus as containing the Tablets of Stone on which the Ten Commandments were inscribed .
According to some traditional interpretations of the Book of Exodus , Book of Numbers , and the Letter to the Hebrews , the Ark also contained Aaron 's rod , a jar of manna , and the first Torah scroll as written by Moses ; however , the first of the Books of Kings says that at the time of King Solomon , the Ark contained only the two Tablets of the Law .
According to the Book of Exodus , the Ark was built at the command of God , in accordance with the instructions given to Moses on Mount Sinai .
God was said to have communicated with Moses "from between the two cherubim " on the Ark 's cover .
The biblical account relates that about a year after the Israelites ' exodus from Egypt , the Ark was created according to the pattern given to Moses by God when Israel was encamped at the foot of Mount Sinai .
Thereafter the gold-plated acacia chest was carried by the Levites some 2,000 cubits in advance of the people when on the march or before the Israelite army , the host of fighting men .
When the Ark was borne by Levites into the bed of the Jordan River , the waters parted as God had parted the waters of the Red Sea , opening a pathway for the entire host to pass through ( Josh .
The walls of the city of Jericho were shaken to the ground with no more than a shout from the army after the Ark of the Covenant was paraded round them for seven days by Levites accompanied by seven priests sounding seven trumpets of rams ' horns ( Josh .
When carried , the Ark was always hidden under a large veil made of skins and blue cloth , always carefully concealed , even from the eyes of the priests and the Levites who carried it .
There are no contemporary extra-biblical references to the Ark .
In the Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches , the Blessed Virgin Mary is sometimes allegorically referred to as the Ark of the Covenant , in that she bore Jesus Christ in similarity to the original tangible contents of the Ark , as cited in the Book of Revelation and ( in Roman Catholicism ) the Litany of Loreto .
According to the Book of Exodus , Yahweh instructed Moses on Mount Sinai during his 40-day stay upon the mountain within the thick cloud and darkness where God was ( Ex .
19:20 ; 24 :18 ) and he was shown the pattern for the tabernacle and furnishings of the Ark to be made of shittim wood to house the Tablets of Stone .
Moses instructed Bezalel and Oholiab to construct the ark ( Exodus 31 ) .
The Book of Exodus gives detailed instructions on how the Ark is to be constructed .
It is to be 2½ cubits in length , 1½ in breadth , and 1½ in height ( approximately ) .
Then it is to be plated entirely with gold , and a crown or molding of gold is to be put around it .
Four rings of gold are to be attached to its four feet—two on each side—and through these rings staves of shittim-wood overlaid with gold for carrying the Ark are to be inserted ; and these are not to be removed .
A golden cover , a "kapporet " ( traditionally " Mercy Seat " in Christian translations ) adorned with golden cherubim , is to be placed above the Ark .
The Ark is finally to be placed behind a veil ( " Parochet " ) , a full description of which is also given at .
After its creation by Moses , the Ark was carried by the Israelites during their 40 years of wandering in the desert .
Whenever the Israelites camped , the Ark was placed in a special and sacred tent , called the Tabernacle .
When the Israelites , led by Joshua toward the Promised Land , arrived at the banks of the River Jordan , the Ark was carried in the lead preceding the people and was the signal for their advance ( Joshua 3:3 , 6 ) .
During the crossing , the river grew dry as soon as the feet of the priests carrying the Ark touched its waters , and remained so until the priests—with the Ark—left the river after the people had passed over ( Josh .
As memorials , twelve stones were taken from the Jordan at the place where the priests had stood ( Josh .
In the Battle of Jericho , the Ark was carried round the city once a day for seven days , preceded by the armed men and seven priests sounding seven trumpets of rams ' horns ( Josh .
On the seventh day , the seven priests sounding the seven trumpets of rams ' horns before the Ark compassed the city seven times and , with a great shout , Jericho 's wall fell down flat and the people took the city ( Josh .
After the defeat at Ai , Joshua lamented before the Ark ( Josh .
When Joshua read the Law to the people between Mount Gerizim and Mount Ebal , they stood on each side of the Ark .
The Ark was again set up by Joshua at Shiloh , but when the Israelites fought against Benjamin at Gibeah , they had the Ark with them and consulted it after their defeat .
The Ark is next spoken of as being in the Tabernacle at Shiloh during Samuel 's apprenticeship ( 1 Sam .
After the settlement of the Israelites in Canaan , the Ark remained in the Tabernacle at Gilgal for a season before being removed to Shiloh until the time of Eli , between 300 and 400 years ( Jeremiah 7:12 ) , when it was carried into the field of battle , so as to secure , as they had hoped , victory to the Hebrews .
The Ark was taken by the Philistines ( 1 Sam .
4:3-11 ) who subsequently sent it back after retaining it for seven months ( 1 Sam .
5:7 , 8 ) because of the events said to have transpired .
After their first defeat at Eben-ezer , the Israelites had the Ark brought from Shiloh , and welcomed its coming with great rejoicing .
In the second battle , the Israelites were again defeated , and the Philistines captured the Ark ( 1 Sam .
The news of its capture was at once taken to Shiloh by a messenger " with his clothes rent , and with earth upon his head . "
The old priest , Eli , fell dead when he heard it ; and his daughter-in-law , bearing a son at the time the news of the capture of the Ark was received , named him Ichabod—explained as " The glory has departed Israel " in reference to the loss of the Ark ( 1 Sam .
The Philistines took the Ark to several places in their country , and at each place misfortune befell them ( 1 Sam .
At Ashdod it was placed in the temple of Dagon .
The next morning Dagon was found prostrate , bowed down , before it ; and on being restored to his place , he was on the following morning again found prostrate and broken .
The people of Ashdod were smitten with hemorrhoids ; a plague of mice was sent over the land ( 1 Sam .
The affliction of boils was also visited upon the people of Gath and of Ekron , whither the Ark was successively removed ( 1 Sam .
After the Ark had been among them for seven months , the Philistines , on the advice of their diviners , returned it to the Israelites , accompanying its return with an offering consisting of golden images of the tumors and mice wherewith they had been afflicted .
The Ark was set in the field of Joshua the Beth-shemite , and the Beth-shemites offered sacrifices and burnt offerings ( 1 Sam .
Out of curiosity the men of Beth-shemesh gazed at the Ark ; and as a punishment , seventy of them ( fifty thousand and seventy in some mss . ) were smitten by the Lord ( 1 Sam .
The Bethshemites sent to Kirjath-jearim , or Baal-Judah , to have the Ark removed ( 1 Sam .
6:21 ) ; and it was taken to the house of Abinadab , whose son Eleazar was sanctified to keep it .
Kirjath-jearim remained the abode of the Ark for twenty years .
Under Saul , the Ark was with the army before he first met the Philistines , but the king was too impatient to consult it before engaging in battle .
In 1 Chronicles 13:3 it is stated that the people were not accustomed to consult the Ark in the days of Saul .
At the beginning of his reign , King David removed the Ark from Kirjath-jearim amid great rejoicing .
On the way to Zion , Uzzah , one of the drivers of the cart whereon the Ark was carried , put out his hand to steady the Ark , and was smitten by God for touching it .
David , in fear , carried the Ark aside into the house of Obed-edom the Gittite , instead of carrying it on to Zion , and there it stayed three months ( 2 Samuel 6:1-11 ; 1 Chronicles 13 :1-13 ) .
On hearing that God had blessed Obed-edom because of the presence of the Ark in his house , David had the Ark brought to Zion by the Levites , while he himself , "girded with a linen ephod , " "danced before the Lord with all his might " and in the sight of all the public gathered in Jerusalem—a performance that caused him to be scornfully rebuked by his first wife , Saul 's daughter Michal ( 2 Sam .
In Zion , David put the Ark in the tabernacle he had prepared for it , offered sacrifices , distributed food , and blessed the people and his own household ( 2 Sam .
The Levites were appointed to minister before the Ark ( 1 Chron .
David 's plan of building a temple for the Ark was stopped at the advice of God ( 2 Sam .
The Ark was with the army during the siege of Rabbah ( 2 Sam .
11:11 ) ; and when David fled from Jerusalem at the time of Absalom 's conspiracy , the Ark was carried along with him until he ordered Zadok the priest to return it to Jerusalem ( 2 Sam .
When Abiathar was dismissed from the priesthood by King Solomon for having taken part in Adonijah 's conspiracy against David , his life was spared because he had formerly borne the Ark ( 1 Kings 2:26 ) .
Solomon worshipped before the Ark after his dream in which God promised him wisdom ( 1 Kings 3:15 ) .
During the construction of Solomon 's Temple , a special inner room , named " Kodesh Hakodashim " ( Eng .
Holy of Holies ) , was prepared to receive and house the Ark ( 1 Kings 6:19 ) ; and when the Temple was dedicated , the Ark—containing the original tablets of the Ten Commandments—was placed therein ( 1 Kings 8:6-9 ) .
When the priests emerged from the holy place after placing the Ark there , the Temple was filled with a cloud , " for the glory of the Lord had filled the house of the Lord " ( 1 Kings 8:10-11 ; 2 Chron .
When Solomon married Pharaoh 's daughter , he caused her to dwell in a house outside Zion , as Zion was consecrated because of its containing the Ark ( 2 Chron .
King Josiah also had the Ark put in the Temple ( 2 Chron .
35:3 ) , from which it appears to have been removed by one of his predecessors ( cf . 2 Chron .
In 597 BC , the Babylonians destroyed Jerusalem and Solomon 's Temple .
There is no record of what became of the Ark in the Books of Kings and Chronicles .
But the Greek 3rd Book of Ezra ( 1 Esdras ) suggests that Babylonians took away the vessels of the ark of God ( but does not mention taking away The Ark itself ) :
In Rabbinic Literature , the final disposition of the Ark is disputed .
Some rabbis hold that it must have been carried off to Babylon , while others hold that it must have been hidden lest it be carried off into Babylon and never brought back .
A late 2nd century rabbinic work known as the " Tosefta " brings down the opinions of these rabbis as to the Ark 's whereabouts .
There , it states anonymously that during the reign of Josiah the king of Judah he stored away the Ark , along with the jar of manna , and a jar containing the holy anointing oil , the rod of Aaron which budded and a chest given to Israel by the Philistines .
This was said to have been done in order to prevent their being carried off into Babylon as had already happened to the other vessels .
Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Shimon , in the same rabbinic work , purport that the Ark was , in fact , taken into Babylon .
Rabbi Yehudah , dissenting , says that the Ark was stored away in its own place , meaning , somewhere on the Temple Mount .
The Ark is first mentioned in the Book of Exodus , and then numerous times in Deuteronomy , Joshua , Judges , I Samuel , II Samuel , I Kings , I Chronicles , II Chronicles , Psalms and Jeremiah .
In the Book of Jeremiah , it is referenced by Jeremiah , who , speaking in the days of Josiah ( Jer .
3:16 ) , prophesied a future time , possibly the end of days , when the Ark will no longer be talked about or be made again :
Rashi comments on this verse that " The entire people will be so imbued with the spirit of sanctity that God 's Presence will rest upon them collectively , as if the congregation itself was the Ark of the Covenant . "
According to the Jewish Deuterocanonical book Second Maccabees , the Greek text in the Septuagint , at the beginning of chapter 2 :
The "mountain from the top of which Moses saw God 's promised land " would be Mount Nebo , located in what is now Jordan .
In the New Testament , the Ark is mentioned in the Letter to the Hebrews and the Revelation to St . John .
states that the Ark contained " the golden pot that had manna , and Aaron 's rod that budded , and the tablets of the covenant . "
says the prophet saw God 's temple in heaven opened , " and the ark of his covenant was seen within his temple . "
A number of Roman Catholic writers connect this verse with the Woman of the Apocalypse in , which immediately follows , and argue that the Blessed Virgin Mary is the " Ark of the New Covenant . "
Carrying the saviour of mankind within her , she herself became the Holy of Holies .
This is the interpretation given in the fourth century by Saint Ambrose , Saint Ephraem of Syria and Saint Augustine .
It is also believed by Roman Catholics that Athanasius the bishop of Alexandria wrote about the connections between the Ark and the Virgin Mary : " O noble Virgin , truly you are greater than any other greatness .
For who is your equal in greatness , O dwelling place of God the Word ?
To whom among all creatures shall I compare you , O Virgin ?
You are greater than them all O ( Ark of the ) Covenant , clothed with purity instead of gold !
You are the Ark in which is found the golden vessel containing the true manna , that is , the flesh in which Divinity resides " ( " Homily of the Papyrus of Turin " ) .
However , some question the authenticity of this work and suggest it is an example of the writing of yet another Pseudo-Athanasius .
In chapter 2 ( " Sura " 2 ) of the Islamic Qur 'an ( Verse 248 ) , the Children of Israel , at the time of Samuel and Saul , were given back the " Tabut E Sakina " ( the casket of Shekhinah ) which contained remnants of the household of Musa ( Moses ) and Harun ( Aaron ) carried by angels which confirmed peace and reassurance for them from their Lord .
The Islamic scholar Al Baidawi mentioned that the " sakina " could be Tawrat , the Books of Moses .
According to Al-Jalalan , the relics in the Ark were the fragments of the two tablets , rods , robes , shoes , mitres of Moses and the vase of manna .
Al-Tha'alibi , in " Qisas Al-Anbiya " ( The Stories of the Prophets ) , has given an earlier and later history of the Ark .
According to most Muslim scholars , the Ark of the Covenant has a religious basis in Islam , and Islam gives it special significance .
A Shia sect of Muslims believe that it will be found by Mahdi near the end of times from Lake Tiberias .
Since its disappearance from the Biblical narrative , there have been a number of claims of having discovered or of having possession of the Ark , and several possible places have been suggested for its location .
2 Maccabees 2:4-10 , written around 100 BC , says that the prophet Jeremiah , "being warned by God " before the Babylonian invasion , took the Ark , the Tabernacle , and the Altar of Incense , and buried them in a cave on Mount Nebo , informing those of his followers who wished to find the place that it should remain unknown "until the time that God should gather His people again together , and receive them unto mercy . "
Mount Nebo is also described in the Bible ( Deuteronomy 34 ) as the site from which Moses views the Promised Land , and apparently also is his final burial place .
Mount Nebo is approximately 29 miles ( 47 km ) slightly south of due east from Jerusalem , near the east bank of the Jordan River .
The Ethiopian Orthodox Church claims to possess the Ark of the Covenant , or " Tabot" , in Axum , not far from the border with Eritrea .
The object is currently kept under guard in a treasury near the Church of Our Lady Mary of Zion .
Replicas of the Axum "tabot " are kept in every Ethiopian church , each with its own dedication to a particular saint ; the most popular of these include Mary , George and Michael .
The " Kebra Nagast" , composed to legitimise the new dynasty ruling Ethiopia following its establishment in 1270 , narrates how the real Ark of the Covenant was brought to Ethiopia by Menelik I with divine assistance , while a forgery was left in the Temple in Jerusalem .
Although the " Kebra Nagast " is the best-known account of this belief , the belief predates the document .
Abu al-Makarim , writing in the last quarter of the twelfth century , makes one early reference to this belief that they possessed the Ark . " The Abyssinians possess also the Ark of the Covenant" , he wrote , and , after a description of the object , describes how the liturgy is celebrated upon the Ark four times a year , "on the feast of the great nativity , on the feast of the glorious Baptism , on the feast of the holy Resurrection , and on the feast of the illuminating Cross . "
In the 1992 book " The Sign and the Seal" , controversial British writer Graham Hancock suggests , contrary to the " Kebra Nagast" , that the ark spent several years in Egypt before it came to Ethiopia via the Nile River , where it was kept in the islands of Lake Tana for about four hundred years and finally taken to Axum .
Archaeologist John Holladay of the University of Toronto called Hancock 's theory "garbage and hogwash , " while Edward Ullendorff , a former Professor of Ethiopian Studies at the University of London , said he "wasted a lot of time reading it . "
On 25 June 2009 , the patriarch of the Orthodox Church of Ethiopia , Abune Paulos , said he would announce to the world the next day the unveiling of the Ark of the Covenant , which he said had been kept safe and secure in a church in Axum , Ethiopia .
The following day , on 26 June 2009 , the patriarch announced that he would not unveil the Ark after all , but that instead he could attest to its current status .
Ron Wyatt ( 1933-1999 ) claimed in 1982 to have found the Ark of the Covenant in an underground cave still located in Jerusalem .
The Lemba people of South Africa and Zimbabwe have claimed that their ancestors carried the Ark south , calling it the "ngoma lungundu " or "voice of God" , eventually hiding it in a deep cave in the Dumghe mountains , their spiritual home .
On 14 April 2008 , in a UK Channel 4 documentary , Tudor Parfitt , taking a literalist approach to the Biblical story , described his research into this claim .
He says that the object described by the Lemba has attributes similar to the Ark .
It was of similar size , was carried on poles by priests , was not allowed to touch the ground , was revered as a voice of their God , and was used as a weapon of great power , sweeping enemies aside .
In his book " The Lost Ark of the Covenant " ( 2008 ) , Parfitt also suggests that the Ark was taken to Arabia following the events depicted in the Second Book of Maccabees , and cites Arabic sources which maintain it was brought in distant times to Yemen .
One Lemba clan , the Buba , which was supposed to have brought the Ark to Africa , have a genetic signature called the Cohen Modal Haplotype .
This suggests a male Semitic link to the Levant .
Lemba tradition maintains that the Ark spent some time in Sena in Yemen .
Later , it was taken across the sea to East Africa and may have been taken inland at the time of the Great Zimbabwe civilization .
According to their oral traditions , some time after the arrival of the Lemba with the Ark , it self-destructed .
Using a core from the original , the Lemba priests constructed a new one .
This replica was discovered in a cave by a Swedish German missionary named Harald von Sicard in the 1940s and eventually found its way to the Museum of Human Science in Harare .
Parfitt had this artifact radio-carbon dated to about 1350 , which coincided with the sudden end of the Great Zimbabwe civilization .
French author Louis Charpentier claimed that the Ark was taken to Chartres Cathedral by the Knights Templar .
Several recent authors have theorised that the Ark was taken from Jerusalem to the village of Rennes-le-Château in Southern France .
Karen Ralls has cited Freemason Patrick Byrne , who believes the Ark was moved from Rennes-le-Château at the outbreak of World War I to the United States .
The Ark of the Covenant was said to have been kept in the Basilica of St . John Lateran , surviving the pillages of Rome by Genseric and Alaric I but lost when the basilica burned .
In 2003 , author Graham Phillips hypothetically concluded that the Ark was taken to Mount Sinai in the Valley of Edom by the Maccabees .
Phillips claims it remained there until the 1180s , when Ralph de Sudeley , the leader of the Templars found the Maccabean treasure at Jebel al-Madhbah , and returned home to his estate at Herdewyke in Warwickshire , England taking the treasure with him .
During the turn of the 20th century British Israelites carried out some excavations of the Hill of Tara in Ireland looking for the Ark of the Covenant—the Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland campaigned successfully to have them stopped before they destroyed the hill .
In 1922 in the Egyptian Valley of the Kings the tomb of Tutankhamun ( KV62 ) was opened by Howard Carter and Lord Carnarvon .
Among the artifacts was a processional ark , listed as Shrine 261 , the Anubis Shrine .
Almost immediately after publication of the photographs of this sensational archaeological find some claimed that the Anubis Shrine could be the Ark of the Covenant .
John M. Lundquist , author of " The Temple of Jerusalem : past , present , and future " ( 2008 ) , discounts this idea .
The Anubis Shrine measures long , wide , and high in the shape of a pylon .
The Biblical Ark of the Covenant is approximately long , wide , and high in the shape of a rectangular chest .
He points out that Shrine 261 is not strictly analogous to the Ark of the Covenant : it can only be said that the Anubis Shrine is "ark-like" , constructed of wood , gessoed and gilded , stored within a sacred tomb , "guarding " the treasury of the tomb ( and not the primary focus of that environment ) , that it contains compartments within it that store and hold sacred objects , that it has a figure of Anubis on its lid , and that it was carried by two staves permanently inserted into rings at its base and borne by eight priests in the funerary procession to Tutankhamun 's tomb .
Its value is the insight it provides to the ancient culture of Egypt .
The Ark of the Covenant is the MacGuffin of Steven Spielberg 's 1981 adventure film " Raiders of the Lost Ark" and appears in a cameo in " Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull" .
It is also mentioned briefly in the 1989 Indiana Jones film " Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade " while in a catacomb in Venice .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
The Angles ( Latin Anglii ) were one of the main Germanic peoples who settled in Britain in the post-Roman period .
They founded several of the kingdoms of Anglo-Saxon England , and their name is the root of the name " England " .
The name comes from the district of Angeln , an area located on the Baltic shore of what is now Schleswig-Holstein , the most northern state of Germany .
The name of the Angles was first recorded in Latinised form , as " Anglii" , in the " Germania " of Tacitus .
It is thought to derive from the name of the area they originally inhabited : " Angeln " in modern German , " Angel " in Danish .
This name has been hypothesised to originate from the Germanic root for "narrow " ( compare German "eng " = "narrow" ) , meaning " the Narrow " , i .e . the Schlei estuary ; the root would be angh , "tight " .
Another theory is that the name meant "hook" , as in angling for fish ; Julius Pokorny , a major Indo-European linguist , derives it from *ang-, "bend " ( see ankle ) .
Gregory the Great in an epistle simplified the Latinised name " Anglii " to " Angli" , the latter form developing into the preferred form of the word .
King Alfred 's ( Alfred the Great ) translation of Orosius ' history of the world uses " Angelcynn " (-kin ) to describe England and the English people ; Bede used " Angelfolc " (-folk ) ; there are also such forms as " Engel" , " Englan " ( the people ) , " Englaland" , and " Englisc" , all showing i-mutation .
The earliest recorded mention of the Angles may be in Tacitus ' " Germania" , chapter .
Tacitus describes the " Anglii " as one of the more remote Suebic tribes compared to the Semnones and Langobardi , who lived on the Elbe and were better known to the Romans .
He grouped the Angles with several other tribes in that region , the Reudigni , Aviones , Varini , Eudoses , Suarini and Nuitones .
He gives no precise indication of their geographical situation but states that , together with six other tribes , they worshiped Nerthus , or Mother Earth , whose sanctuary was located on " an island in the Ocean " .
As the Eudoses are the Jutes , these names probably refer to localities in Jutland or on the Baltic coast , in which case their inhabitants would be Cimbri or Teutones for Pliny .
The coast contains sufficient estuaries , inlets , rivers , islands , swamps and marshes to have been then inaccessible to those not familiar with the terrain , such as the Romans , who considered it unknown , inaccessible , with a small population and of little economic interest .
The majority of scholars believe that the Anglii lived on the coasts of the Baltic Sea , probably in the southern part of the Jutish peninsula .
This view is based partly on Old English and Danish traditions regarding persons and events of the 4th century , and partly on the fact that striking affinities to the cult of Nerthus as described by Tacitus are to be found in pre-Christian Scandinavian , especially Swedish and Danish , religion .
Ptolemy in his " Geography " ( 2.10 ) , half a century later , describes the " Sueboi Angeilloi" , Latinised to " Suevi Angili" , further south , living in a stretch of land between the northern Rhine and central Elbe , but apparently not touching either river , with the Suebic Langobardi on the Rhine to their west , and the Suebic Semnones on the Elbe stretching to their east .
These Suevi Angili would have been in Lower Saxony or near it , but they are not coastal .
The three Suebic peoples are separated from the coastal Chauci , ( between Ems and Elbe ) , and Saxones , ( east of the Elbe mouth ) , by a series of tribes including , between Weser and Elbe , the Angrivarii , " Laccobardi" ( probably another reference to Langobardi , but taken by Ptolemy from another source ) , and Dulgubnii .
South of the Saxons , and east of the Elbe , Ptolemy lists " Ouirounoi" ( Latinised as Viruni , and probably the Varini ) and Teutonoari , which either denotes " the Teuton men" , or else it denotes people living in the area where the Teutons had previously lived ( who Ptolemy places still living to the east of the Teutonoari ) .
Ptolemy describes the coast to the east of the Saxons as inhabited by the Farodini , a name not known from any other sources .
Owing to the uncertainty of this passage , there has been much speculation regarding the original home of the Anglii .
One theory is that they or part of them dwelt or moved among other coastal people perhaps confederated up to the basin of the Saale ( in the neighbourhood of the ancient canton of Engilin ) on the Unstrut valleys below the Kyffhäuserkreis , from which region the " Lex Angliorum et Werinorum hoc est Thuringorum " is believed by many to have come .
The ethnic names of Frisians and Warines are attested in the neighbourhood names of this Saxon or Swabian lands .
A second possible solution is that these Angles of Ptolemy are not those of Schleswig at all .
According to Julius Pokorny the Angri- in Angrivarii , the -angr in Hardanger and the Angl- in Anglii all come from the same root meaning "bend" , but in different senses .
In other words , the similarity of the names is strictly coincidental and does not reflect any ethnic unity beyond Germanic .
On the other hand , Gudmund Schütte , in his analysis of Ptolemy , believes that the Angles have simply been moved by an error coming from Ptolemy 's use of imperfect sources .
He points out that Angles are placed correctly just to the northeast of the Langobardi , but that these have been duplicated , so that they appear once , correctly , on the lower Elbe , and a second time , incorrectly , at the northern Rhine .
Bede states that the Anglii , before coming to Great Britain , dwelt in a land called Angulus , " which lies between the province of the Jutes and the Saxons , and remains unpopulated to this day . "
Similar evidence is given by the " Historia Brittonum" .
King Alfred the Great and the chronicler Æthelweard identified this place with the district that is now called Angeln , in the province of Schleswig ( Slesvig ) ( though it may then have been of greater extent ) , and this identification agrees with the indications given by Bede .
In the Norwegian seafarer Ohthere of Hålogaland 's account of a two-day voyage from the Oslo fjord to Schleswig , he reported the lands on his starboard bow , and Alfred appended the note "on these islands dwelt the " Engle " before they came hither " .
Confirmation is afforded by English and Danish traditions relating to two kings named Wermund and Offa of Angel , from whom the Mercian royal family claimed descent and whose exploits are connected with Angeln , Schleswig , and Rendsburg .
Danish tradition has preserved record of two governors of Schleswig , father and son , in their service , Frowinus ( Freawine ) and Wigo ( Wig ) , from whom the royal family of Wessex claimed descent .
During the 5th century , the Anglii invaded Great Britain , after which time their name does not recur on the continent except in the title of " Suevi Angili" .
The Angles are the subject of a legend about Pope Gregory I , who happened to see a group of Angle children from Deira for sale as slaves in the Roman market .
As the story would later be told by the Anglo-Saxon monk and historian Bede , Gregory was struck by the unusual appearance of the slaves and asked about their background .
When told they were called " " Anglii " " ( Angles ) , he replied with a Latin pun that translates well into English : “" Bene , nam et angelicam habent faciem , et tales angelorum in caelis decet esse coheredes " ” ( " It is well , for they have an angelic face , and such people ought to be co-heirs of the angels in heaven " ) .
Supposedly , this encounter inspired the Pope to launch a mission to bring Christianity to their countrymen .
The province of Schleswig has proved rich in prehistoric antiquities that date apparently from the 4th and 5th centuries .
A broad cremation cemetery has been found at Borgstedterfeld , between Rendsburg and Eckernförde , and it has yielded many urns and brooches closely resembling those found in pagan graves in England .
Of still greater importance are the great deposits at Thorsberg moor ( in Angeln ) and Nydam , which contained large quantities of arms , ornaments , articles of clothing , agricultural implements , etc. , and in Nydam even ships .
By the help of these discoveries , Angle culture in the age preceding the invasion of Britannia can be fitted together .
According to sources such as the History of Bede , after the invasion of Britannia , the Angles split up and founded the kingdoms of the Northumbria , East Anglia and Mercia .
H.R. Loyn has observed in this context that " a sea voyage is perilous to tribal institutions , " and the apparently tribally-based kingdoms were produced in England .
In early times there were two northern kingdoms ( Bernicia and Deira ) and two midland ones ( Middle Anglia and Mercia ) .
As a result of influence from the West Saxons , the tribes were collectively called Anglo-Saxons by the Normans , the West Saxon kingdom having conquered , united and founded the Kingdom of England by the 10th century .
The regions of East Anglia and Northumbria are still known by their original titles .
Northumbria once stretched as far north as what is now southeast Scotland , including Edinburgh , and as far south as the Humber Estuary .
The rest of that people stayed at the centre of the Angle homeland in the northeastern portion of the modern German " Bundesland " of Schleswig-Holstein , on the Jutland Peninsula .
There , a small peninsular area is still called " Angeln " today and is formed as a triangle drawn roughly from modern Flensburg on the Flensburger Fjord to the City of Schleswig and then to Maasholm , on the Schlei inlet .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Animated television series are television programs produced by means of animation .
Animated series produced for theaters are not included in this lists ; for those , see List of animated short series .
These lists include compilation series of theatrical shorts such as " The Bugs Bunny Show " since they often feature some new wrap-around animation .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
ABC are the first three letters of the Latin script .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Aage Niels Bohr ( ; 19 June 1922 – 9 September 2009 ) was a Danish nuclear physicist and Nobel laureate , and the son of the famous physicist and Nobel laureate Niels Bohr .
Bohr was born in Copenhagen in 1922 , and grew up surrounded by physicists such as Wolfgang Pauli and Werner Heisenberg , who were working with his father at the Institute for Theoretical Physics ( now the Niels Bohr Institute ) at the University of Copenhagen .
In 1940 , shortly after the German occupation of Denmark , Bohr began his physics degree at the University of Copenhagen .
In October 1943 , shortly before he was to be arrested by the German police , Niels Bohr escaped to Sweden with his family , later travelling to London and on to work on the Manhattan Project .
During this time , Aage Bohr travelled with his father , acting as his assistant and secretary .
The Bohrs returned to Denmark in 1945 , and Aage resumed his university education , graduating with a master 's degree in 1946 , with a thesis concerned with some aspects of atomic stopping problems .
Following graduation , he became an associate at the Niels Bohr Institute .
Bohr worked at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton in early 1948 , and later at Columbia University from January 1949 to August 1950 .
While in the US , Bohr married Marietta Soffer ; the couple had three children , Vilhelm , Tomas and Margrethe .
Only after doing his Nobel Prize-winning research did Bohr receive his doctorate from the University of Copenhagen , in 1954 or 1956 .
Bohr became a professor at the University of Copenhagen in 1956 , and , following his father 's death in 1962 , succeeded him as director of the Niels Bohr Institute , a position he held until 1970 .
He was also a member of the board of the Nordic Institute for Theoretical Physics ( Nordita ) from its inception in 1957 , becoming its director in 1975 .
In 1978 he was elected to the Pontifical Academy of Sciences .
Aage Bohr 's son , Tomas Bohr , is a Professor of Physics at the Technical University of Denmark , working in the area of fluid dynamics .
Tomas 's two cousins , Jakob and Henrik Bohr , are also professors at the Technical University of Denmark .
Jakob at DTU Nanotech , and Henrik also in the Physics Institute and Director of the Quantum Protein ( QuP ) Center .
By the late 1940s it was known that the properties of atomic nucleus could not be explained by the then-current models ( such as the liquid drop model developed by Niels Bohr amongst others ) .
The shell model , developed in 1949 , allowed some additional features to be explained , in particular the so-called magic numbers .
However , there were also properties which could not be explained , including the non-spherical distribution of charge in certain nuclei .
James Rainwater of Columbia University suggested a model of the nucleus which could explain a non-spherical charge distribution in a 1950 paper .
Bohr , visiting Columbia at the time , had independently conceived the same idea , and submitted a paper for publication about a month after Rainwater 's which discussed the same problem along more general lines .
Bohr later developed the idea further , in 1951 publishing a paper which comprehensively treated the relationship between oscillations of the surface of the nucleus and the movement of the individual nucleons .
On his return to Copenhagen in 1950 , Bohr began working with Ben Roy Mottelson to compare the theoretical work with experimental data .
In three papers which were published in 1952–53 , Bohr and Mottelson demonstrated close agreement between theory and experiment ; for example , showing that the energy levels of certain nuclei could be described by a rotation spectrum .
This work stimulated new theoretical and experimental studies .
As a result , he won the Atoms for Peace Award in 1969 .
Bohr , Mottelson and Rainwater were jointly awarded the 1975 Nobel Prize in Physics " for the discovery of the connection between collective motion and particle motion in atomic nuclei and the development of the theory of the structure of the atomic nucleus based on this connection " .
Bohr and Mottelson continued to work together , publishing a two-volume monograph , " Nuclear Structure " .
The first volume , " Single-Particle Motion , " appeared in 1969 , and the second volume , " Nuclear Deformations , " in 1975 .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Additive synthesis is a sound synthesis technique that creates timbre by adding sine waves together .
The timbre of musical instruments can be considered in the light of Fourier theory to consist of multiple harmonic or inharmonic "partials " or overtones .
Each partial is a sine wave of different frequency and amplitude that swells and decays over time .
Additive synthesis most directly generates sound by adding the output of multiple sine wave generators .
Alternative implementations may use pre-computed wavetables or the inverse Fast Fourier transform .
Harmonic additive synthesis is closely related to the concept of a Fourier series which is a way of expressing a periodic function as the sum of sinusoidal functions with frequencies equal to integer multiples of a common fundamental frequency .
These sinusoids are called harmonics , overtones , or generally , partials .
In general , a Fourier series contains an infinite number of sinusoidal components , with no upper limit to the frequency of the sinusoidal functions and includes a DC component ( one with frequency of 0 Hz ) .
Frequencies outside of the human audible range can be omitted in additive synthesis .
As a result only a finite number of sinusoidal terms with frequencies that lie within the audible range are modeled in additive synthesis .
A waveform or function is said to be periodic if
for all formula_2 and for some period formula_3 .
The Fourier series of a periodic function is mathematically expressed as :
Being inaudible , the DC component , formula_12 , and all components with frequencies higher than some finite limit , formula_13 , are omitted in the following expressions of additive synthesis .
The simplest harmonic additive synthesis can be mathematically expressed as :
where formula_14 is the synthesis output , formula_15 , formula_16 , and formula_17 are the amplitude , frequency , and the phase offset , respectively , of the formula_9th harmonic partial of a total of formula_19 harmonic partials , and formula_20 is the fundamental frequency of the waveform and the frequency of the musical note .
More generally , the amplitude of each harmonic can be prescribed as a function of time , formula_21 , in which case the synthesis output is
Each envelope formula_21 should vary slowly relative to the frequency spacing between adjacent sinusoids .
The bandwidth of formula_21 should be significantly less than formula_20 .
Additive synthesis can also produce inharmonic sounds ( which are aperiodic waveforms ) in which the individual overtones need not have frequencies that are integer multiples of some common fundamental frequency .
While many conventional musical instruments have harmonic partials ( e .g . an oboe ) , some have inharmonic partials ( e .g .
where formula_26 is the constant frequency of formula_9th partial .
In the general case , the instantaneous frequency of a sinusoid is the derivative ( with respect to time ) of the argument of the sine or cosine function .
If this frequency is represented in hertz , rather than in angular frequency form , then this derivative is divided by formula_28 .
This is the case whether the partial is harmonic or inharmonic and whether its frequency is constant or time-varying .
In the most general form , the frequency of each non-harmonic partial is a non-negative function of time , formula_29 , yielding
" Additive synthesis " has been used as an umbrella term for the class of sound synthesis techniques that sum simple elements to create more complex timbres , even when the elements are not sine waves .
For example , F. Richard Moore listed additive synthesis as one of the "four basic categories " of sound synthesis alongside subtractive synthesis , nonlinear synthesis , and physical modelling .
In this broad sense , pipe organs , which also have pipes producing non-sinusoidal waveforms , can be considered as additive synthesizers .
Summation of principal components and Walsh functions have also been classified as additive synthesis .
Modern-day implementations of additive synthesis are mainly digital .
( See section " Discrete-time equations " for the underlying discrete-time theory )
Additive synthesis can be implemented using a bank of sinusoidal oscillators , one for each partial .
In the case of harmonic , quasi-periodic musical tones , wavetable synthesis can be as general as time-varying additive synthesis , but requires less computation during synthesis .
As a result , an efficient implementation of time-varying additive synthesis of harmonic tones can be accomplished by use of "wavetable synthesis " .
Group additive synthesis is a method to group partials into harmonic groups ( of differing fundamental frequencies ) and synthesize each group separately with "wavetable synthesis " before mixing the results .
An inverse Fast Fourier transform can be used to efficiently synthesize frequencies that evenly divide the transform period or "frame" .
By careful consideration of the DFT frequency-domain representation it is also possible to efficiently synthesize sinusoids of arbitrary frequencies using a series of overlapping frames and the inverse Fast Fourier transform .
It is possible to analyze the frequency components of a recorded sound giving a " sum of sinusoids " representation .
This representation can be re-synthesized using additive synthesis .
One method of decomposing a sound into time varying sinusoidal partials is Fourier Transform-based McAulay-Quatieri Analysis .
By modifying the sum of sinusoids representation , timbral alterations can be made prior to resynthesis .
For example , a harmonic sound could be restructured to sound inharmonic , and vice versa .
Sound hybridisation or "morphing " has been implemented by additive resynthesis .
Additive analysis/resynthesis has been employed in a number of techniques including Sinusoidal Modelling , Spectral Modelling Synthesis ( SMS ) , and the Reassigned Bandwidth-Enhanced Additive Sound Model .
Software that implements additive analysis/resynthesis includes : SPEAR , LEMUR , LORIS , SMSTools , ARSS.
New England Digital Synclavier had a resynthesis feature where samples could be analyzed and converted into ”timbre frames ” which were part of its additive synthesis engine .
Technos acxel , launched in 1987 , utilized the additive analysis/resynthesis model , in an FFT implementation .
Also a vocal synthesizer , Vocaloid have been implemented on the basis of additive analysis/resynthesis : its spectral voice model called Excitation plus Resonances ( EpR ) model
</ref> is extended based on Spectral Modeling Synthesis ( SMS ) ,
and its diphone concatenative synthesis is processed using
" spectral peak processing " ( SPP ) technique similar to modified phase-locked vocoder ( an improved phase vocoder for formant processing ) .
Using these techniques , spectral components ( "formants " ) consisting of purely harmonic partials can be appropriately transformed into desired form for sound modeling , and sequence of short samples ( "diphones " or "phonemes " ) constituting desired phrase , can be smoothly connected by interpolating matched partials and formant peaks , respectively , in the inserted transition region between different samples .
Additive synthesis is used in electronic musical instruments .
In linguistics research , harmonic additive synthesis was used in 1950s to play back modified and synthetic speech spectrograms .
Later , in early 1980s , listening tests were carried out on synthetic speech stripped of acoustic cues to assess their significance .
Time-varying formant frequencies and amplitudes derived by linear predictive coding were synthesized additively as pure tone whistles .
Harmonic analysis was discovered by Joseph Fourier , who published an extensive treatise of his research in the context of heat transfer in 1822 .
The theory found an early application in prediction of tides .
Around 1876 , Lord Kelvin constructed a mechanical tide predictor .
It consisted of a "harmonic analyzer " and a "harmonic synthesizer" , as they were called already in the 19th century .
The analysis of tide measurements was done using James Thomson 's "integrating machine " .
The resulting Fourier coefficients were input into the synthesizer , which then used a system of cords and pulleys to generate and sum harmonic sinusoidal partials for prediction of future tides .
In 1910 , a similar machine was built for the analysis of periodic waveforms of sound .
The synthesizer drew a graph of the combination waveform , which was used chiefly for visual validation of the analysis .
Georg Ohm applied Fourier 's theory to sound in 1843 .
The line of work was greatly advanced by Hermann von Helmholtz , who published his eight years worth of research in 1863 .
Helmholtz believed that the psychological perception of tone color is subject to learning , while hearing in the sensory sense is purely physiological .
He supported the idea that perception of sound derives from signals from nerve cells of the basilar membrane and that the elastic appendages of these cells are sympathetically vibrated by pure sinusoidal tones of appropriate frequencies .
Helmholtz agreed with the finding of Ernst Chladni from 1787 that certain sound sources have inharmonic vibration modes .
For synthesis of tones with harmonic partials , Helmholtz built an electrically excited array of tuning forks and acoustic resonance chambers that allowed adjustment of the amplitudes of the partials .
Built at least as early as in 1862 , these were in turn refined by Rudolph Koenig , who demonstrated his own setup in 1872 .
For harmonic synthesis , Koenig also built a large apparatus based on his "wave siren" .
It was pneumatic and utilized cut-out tonewheels , and was criticized for low purity of its partial tones .
Also tibia pipes of pipe organs have nearly sinusoidal waveforms and can be combined in the manner of additive synthesis .
In 1938 , with significant new supporting evidence , it was reported on the pages of Popular Science Monthly that the human vocal cords function like a fire siren to produce a harmonic-rich tone , which is then filtered by the vocal tract to produce different vowel tones .
By the time , the additive Hammond organ was already on market .
Most early electronic organ makers thought it too expensive to manufacture the plurality of oscillators required by additive organs , and began instead to built subtractive ones .
In a 1940 Institute of Radio Engineers meeting , the head field engineer of Hammond elaborated on the company 's new " Novachord " as having a " “subtractive system ” " in contrast to the original Hammond organ in which " “the final tones were built up by combining sound waves ”" .
Alan Douglas used the qualifiers "additive " and " subtractive " to describe different types of electronic organs in a 1948 paper presented to the Royal Musical Association .
The contemporary wording "additive synthesis " and " subtractive synthesis " can be found in his 1957 book " The electrical production of music" , in which he categorically lists three methods of forming of musical tone-colours , in sections titled " Additive synthesis" , " Subtractive synthesis" , and " Other forms of combinations " .
A typical modern additive synthesizer produces its output as an electrical , analog signal , or as digital audio , such as in the case of software synthesizers , which became popular around year 2000 .
The following is a timeline of historically and technologically notable analog and digital synthesizers and devices implementing additive synthesis .
In digital implementations of additive synthesis , discrete-time equations are used in place of the continuous-time synthesis equations .
A notational convention for discrete-time signals uses brackets i .e . formula_30 and the argument formula_31 can only be integer values .
If the continuous-time synthesis output formula_14 is expected to be sufficiently bandlimited ; below half the sampling rate or formula_33 , it suffices to directly sample the continuous-time expression to get the discrete synthesis equation .
The continuous synthesis output can later be reconstructed from the samples using a digital-to-analog converter .
and sampling at discrete times formula_36 results in
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Afghan ( Pashto : افغان ; see "etymology " ) refers to something from Afghanistan , particularly a citizen of that country .
Prior to this definition , it was used by Persian speakers and those influenced by the Persian language to denote "mostly " the Pashtun people .
In modern times , " Afghan " is still used as an ethnic term as well as the national demonym for all citizens of Afghanistan .
" Pashtun " and variants from the native ethnonym for the Pashtun people , which appears in European publications of the 18th , 19th and 20th centuries , but is now largely used in a linguistic sense for native speakers of Pashto .
According to Encyclopædia Iranica , the word Afghan ( afḡān ) in current political usage means any citizen of Afghanistan , whatever their tribal , or religious affiliation .
According to the 1964 Constitution of Afghanistan , all Afghans are equal in rights and obligations before the law .
The fourth article of the current Constitution of Afghanistan states that citizens of Afghanistan consist of Pashtuns , Tajiks , Hazara , Uzbek , Turkmen , Aymaq , Arab , Baluch , Pashayi , Nuristani , Qezelbash , Gujjars , Brahui , and members of other tribes .
As an adjective , the word Afghan also means " of or relating to Afghanistan or its people , language , or culture " .
The term " Afghani " refers to the unit of Afghan currency .
It is often improperly used for a person or thing related to Afghanistan .
The incorrect use of the term may have originated during the Soviet war in Afghanistan when millions of Afghans took refuge in neighboring Pakistan and Iran .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
An anti-aircraft vehicle , also known as a self-propelled anti-aircraft gun ( SPAAG ) or self-propelled air defense system ( SPAD) , is a mobile vehicle with a dedicated anti-aircraft capability .
The Russian equivalent of "SPAAG " is " ZSU" , for "zenitnaya samokhodnaya ustanovka" , ( "anti-aircraft self-propelled mount " ) .
Specific weapon systems used include machine guns , autocannons , larger guns , or missiles , and some mount both guns and longer-ranged missiles .
Platforms used include both trucks and heavier combat vehicles such as APCs and tanks , which add protection from aircraft , artillery , and small arms fire for front line deployment .
Anti-aircraft guns are usually mounted in a quickly-traversing turret with a high rate of elevation , for tracking fast-moving aircraft .
They are often in dual or quadruple mounts , allowing a high rate of fire .
Today , missiles ( generally mounted on similar turrets ) have largely supplanted anti-aircraft guns .
Anti-aircraft machine guns have long been mounted on trucks , and these were quite common during World War I.
A predecessor of the WW2 German "88 " anti-aircraft gun , the WWI German 77 mm anti-aircraft gun , was truck-mounted and used to great effect against British tanks .
The British QF 3 inch 20 cwt was mounted on trucks for use on the Western Front .
Between the two World Wars the United Kingdom developed the Birch gun , a general purpose artillery piece on an armoured tracked chassis capable of maintaining formation with their current tanks .
The gun could be elevated for anti-aircraft use .
Vickers Armstrong also developed a SPAAG based on the chassis of the Mk. E 6-ton light tank/Dragon Medium Mark IV tractor , mounting a Vickers QF-1 " Pom-Pom " gun of 40 mm .
About 26 were sold to Siam and saw action as Infantry support guns and AA guns during the Franco-Thai war ( 1940-1941)along with 30 Vickers Mk. E Type B 6-ton tanks .
This was probably the first tracked SPAAG manufactured in series .
Later the British also developed a version of the Mk .VI light tank armed with 4 machine guns that was known as Light Tank AA Mk.I.
And also a twin 15 mm version based on the Light Tank Mk .V was built .
Among early pre-war pioneers of self-propelled AA guns were the Germans .
By the time of the war , they fielded the SdKfz 10/4 and 6/2 , cargo halftracks mounting single 20 mm or 37 mm AA guns ( respectively ) .
Later in the war similar German halftracks mounted quadruple 20 mm weapons .
Larger guns followed on larger trucks , but these mountings generally required off-truck setup in order to unlimber the stabilizing legs these guns needed .
One exception to this rule was the Italian Cannone da 90/53 which was highly effective when mounted on trucks , a fit known as the " "autocannoni da 90/53" " .
The 90/53 was a feared weapon , notably in the anti-tank role , but only a few hundred had been produced by the time of the armistice in 1943 .
Other nations tended to work on truck chassis .
Starting in 1941 , the British developed the "en portee " method of mounting an anti-tank gun ( initially a 2 pounder ) on a truck .
This was to prevent the weapon from being damaged by long-distance towing across rough , stony deserts , and it was intended only to be a carrying method , with the gun unloaded for firing .
However , crews tended to fire their weapons from their vehicles for the mobility this method provided , with consequent casualties .
This undoubtedly inspired their Morris C9/B ( officially the " Carrier , SP , 4x4 , 40 mm AA" ) , a Bofors 40 mm AA gun mounted on a chassis derived from the Morris " Quad " Field Artillery Tractor truck .
Similar types , based on 3-ton lorries , were produced in Britain , Canada and Australia , and together formed the most numerous self-propelled AA guns in British service .
The U.S. Army brought truck-towed Bofors 40 mm AA guns along with truck-mounted units fitted with mechanized turrets when they sailed , first for Great Britain and then onto France .
inch ( 12.7 mm ) machine guns , which were designed to be adjusted to converge at the single point where enemy aircraft were expected to appear at low altitude in conduction of strafing runs directed at large infantry and field artillery units .
Interest in mobile AA turned to heavier vehicles with the mass and stability needed to easily train weapons of all sizes .
Probably the desire , particularly in German service , for anti-aircraft vehicles to be armoured for their own protection also assisted this trend .
The concept of an armored SPAAG was pioneered by Hungary during World War II Hungary by producing the 40M Nimrod based on the Luftvärnskanonvagn L-62 Anti II license acquired from Sweden .
German World War II SPAAGs include the Möbelwagen , Wirbelwind , Ostwind and Kugelblitz .
Other forces followed with designs of their own , notably the American M16 created by mounting quadruple M2 machine guns on a M3 Half-track .
The British developed their own SPAAGs throughout the war mounting multiple machine guns and light cannon on various tank and armoured car chassis and by 1943 , the Crusader AA tanks , which mounted the Bofors 40 mm gun or two-three Oerlikon 20 mm cannon .
Although used during the Normandy landings , by that point German aircraft were contained by the Allies own air forces and they were largely unneeded .
The introduction of jet engines and the subsequent rough doubling of aircraft speeds greatly reduced the effectiveness of the SPAGG against attack aircraft .
A typical SPAGG round might have a muzzle velocity on the order of and might take as long as two to three seconds to reach a target at its maximum range .
An aircraft flying at is moving at a rate of about .
This means the aircraft will have moved hundreds of meters during the flight time of the shells , greatly complicating the aiming problem to the point were close passes were essentially impossible to aim using manual gunsights .
This speed also allowed the aircraft to rapidly fly out of range of the guns ; even if the aircraft passes directly over the SPAGG , it would be within its firing radius for under 30 seconds .
SPAGG development continued through the early 1950s with ever-larger guns , improving the range and allowing the engagement to take place at longer distances where the crossing angle was smaller and aiming was easier .
Examples including the 40 mm U.S. M42 Duster and the 57 mm Soviet ZSU-57-2] .
However , both were essentially obsolete before the entered service , and found employment solely in the ground-support role .
The M42 was introduced to the Vietnam War to counter an expected North Vietnamese air offensive , but when this failed to materialize it was used as an effective direct fire weapon .
The ZSU-57 found similar use in the Yugoslav Wars , where its high-angle fire was useful in the mountainous terrain .
By the late 1950s the US Army had given up on the SPAGG concept , considering all gun-based weapons to be useless against modern aircraft .
This belief was generally held by many forces , and the anti-aircraft role turned almost exclusively to missile systems .
The outlier was the Soviet Union , who began development of a new SPAGG in 1957 , emerging as the ZSU-23-4 in 1965 .
This system included search and track radars , fire control , and automatic gun laying , greatly increasing its effectiveness against modern targets .
The ZSU-23 proved very effective when used in concert with SAMs; the presence of SAMs forced the aircraft to fly low to avoid their radars , placing them within range of the ZSUs .
The success of the ZSU-23 led to a resurgence of SPAGG development .
This was also prompted by the introduction of attack helicopters in the 1970s , which could hide behind terrain and then "pop-up " for an attack lasting only a few tens of seconds ; missiles were ineffective at low altitudes , while the helicopters would often be within range of the guns for a rapid counterattack .
Notable among these later systems is the German Gepard , the first western SPAGG to offer performance equal to or better than the ZSU.
This system was widely copied in various NATO forces .
US attempts to introduce a new SPAGG were doomed to become a series of half-measures and dismal failures ; the failure of the missile-based MIM-46 Mauler led to the introduction of the optically-aimed M163 VADS of very short range , and the long-delayed and finally cancelled M247 Sergeant York which offered almost laughable performance in testing , unable to hit even stationary targets .
SPAGG development continues , with many modern examples often combining both guns and short-range missiles .
Examples include the Soviet/Russian Tunguska-M1 , which supplanted the ZSU-23 in service , newer versions of the Gepard , and the British Marksman turret which can be used on a wide variety of platforms .
Other single-type examples include the South Korean K30 Biho and K263A1 radar-guided Vulcan , Chinese Type 95 SPAAA , Swedish CV9040 AAV , Polish PZA Loara , American M6 Bradley Linebacker and M1097 Humvee Avenger , Yugoslavian BOV-3 , Canadian ADATS , Japanese Type 87 SPAAG , Italian SIDAM 25 and Otomatic , and versions of the French AMX-13 , Turkish ACV-15 with Zıpkın PMADS.
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
American Media , Inc. is an American publisher of magazines , supermarket tabloids , and books .
The modern American Media came into being after Generoso Pope , Jr. , longtime owner of " The National Enquirer" , died in 1988 , and his tabloids came under new ownership .
American tabloids began consolidating in 1990 , when American Media bought " Star " from Rupert Murdoch .
The purchase of Globe Communications ( owner of the " Globe " and the " National Examiner " ) followed nine years later .
American Media 's corporate headquarters in Boca Raton , Florida , figured prominently in news headlines in late 2001 , after an anthrax attack was perpetrated on the company .
Since then the corporate headquarters have moved to New York City at 1 Park Avenue in Manhattan , before moving to the Financial District to the former JP Morgan Chase headquarters at 4 New York Plaza .
That building was severely damaged by Hurricane Sandy but reopened in February 2013 .
The CEO , David J. Pecker , travels between the Boca Raton and New York offices while managing the company .
AMI continued to expand after it bought Joe Weider 's Weider Publications in 2002 .
Joe Weider continues to manage control of his magazines under AMI 's Weider Publications subsidiary .
American Media also owns Distribution Services , an in-store magazine merchandising company .
In fall 2002 , it launched the book-publishing imprint , AMI Books .
Roger Altman , through Evercore Partners , bought a controlling stake in American Media in 1999 .
In 2009 , American Media was taken over by its bondholders to keep it out of bankruptcy .
In November 2010 , American Media filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection due to nearly $ 1 billion in debt , and assets of less than $ 50,000 .
Its subsidiary , American Media Operations Inc. , listed assets of $ 100 to $ 500 million and debt of over $ 1 billion .
In May 2014 , American Media announced a decision to shift the headquarters of the " National Enquirer " from Florida , where it had been located since 1971 , back to New York City , where it originally began as The New York Enquirer in 1926.[http ://www.northjersey .com/news/business/national-enquirer-leaving-florida-headquarters-1.1020369]
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Advanced Micro Devices , Inc. is an American multinational semiconductor company based in Sunnyvale , California , United States , that develops computer processors and related technologies for business and consumer markets .
While initially it manufactured its own processors , the company became fabless after GlobalFoundries was spun off in 2009 .
AMD 's main products include microprocessors , motherboard chipsets , embedded processors and graphics processors for servers , workstations and personal computers , and embedded systems applications .
AMD is the second-largest global supplier of microprocessors based on the x86 architecture and also one of the largest suppliers of graphics processing units .
It also owns 8.6 % of Spansion , a supplier of non-volatile flash memory .
AMD is the only significant rival to Intel in the central processor ( CPU) market for ( x86 based ) personal computers .
Since acquiring ATI in 2006 , AMD and its competitor Nvidia have dominated the discrete graphics processor unit ( GPU) market .
Advanced Micro Devices was founded on May 1 , 1969 , by a group of former executives from Fairchild Semiconductor , including Jerry Sanders III , Ed Turney , John Carey , Sven Simonsen , Jack Gifford and three members from Gifford 's team , Frank Botte , Jim Giles , and Larry Stenger .
The company began as a producer of logic chips , then entered the RAM chip business in 1975 .
That same year , it introduced a reverse-engineered clone of the Intel 8080 microprocessor .
During this period , AMD also designed and produced a series of bit-slice processor elements ( Am2900 , Am29116 , Am293xx ) which were used in various minicomputer designs .
During this time , AMD attempted to embrace the perceived shift towards RISC with their own AMD Am29000 ( 29k ) processor , and also attempted to diversify into graphics and audio devices as well as EPROM memory .
It had some success in the mid-1980s with the AMD7910 and AMD7911 " World Chip " FSK modem , one of the first multi-standard devices that covered both Bell and CCITT tones at up to 1200 baud half duplex or 300/300 full duplex .
The 29k survived as an embedded processor and AMD spinoff Spansion continues to make flash memory .
AMD decided to switch gears and concentrate solely on Intel-compatible microprocessors and flash memory , placing them in direct competition with Intel for x86-compatible processors and their flash memory secondary markets .
AMD announced the acquisition of ATI Technologies on July 24 , 2006 .
AMD paid US$ 4.3 billion in cash and 58 million shares of its stock , for a total of US$ 5.4
Since 2010 , all of the company 's graphics processing products have been marketed under the AMD brand name .
It was reported in December 2006 that AMD , along with its main rival in the graphics industry Nvidia , received subpoenas from the Justice Department regarding possible antitrust violations in the graphics card industry , including the act of fixing prices .
In October 2008 , AMD announced plans to spin off manufacturing operations in the form of a multibillion-dollar joint venture with Advanced Technology Investment Co. , an investment company formed by the government of Abu Dhabi .
This partnership will allow AMD to focus solely on chip design .
The spin off was accompanied by the loss of approximately 1000 jobs , or about 10 % of AMD 's global workforce .
In August 2011 , AMD announced that former Lenovo executive Rory Read would be joining the company as CEO , following Dirk Meyer .
AMD announced in November 2011 plans to lay off more than 10 % ( 1400 ) of its employees from across all divisions worldwide .
This action was to have completed by Q1 2012 with most exits before Christmas 2011 .
AMD announced in October 2012 plans to release an additional 15 % of its workforce with an unspecified effective date to reduce costs in the face of declining sales revenue .
AMD acquired the low-power server manufacturer SeaMicro in early 2012 as part of a strategy to regain lost market share in the server chip market .
In February 1982 , AMD signed a contract with Intel , becoming a licensed second-source manufacturer of 8086 and 8088 processors .
IBM wanted to use the Intel 8088 in its IBM PC , but IBM 's policy at the time was to require at least two sources for its chips .
AMD later produced the Am286 under the same arrangement .
By the end of 1986 , IBM PC clones had overtaken the market and Intel decided to no longer abide by IBM 's rules , refusing to convey the technical details of the i386 part .
AMD challenged Intel 's decision to cancel the agreement and won in arbitration , but Intel disputed this decision .
A long legal dispute followed , ending in 1994 when the Supreme Court of California sided with AMD.
Subsequent legal disputes centered on whether AMD had legal rights to use derivatives of Intel 's microcode .
In the face of uncertainty , AMD was forced to develop clean room designed versions of Intel code .
In 1991 , AMD released the Am386 , its clone of the Intel 386 processor .
It took less than a year for the company to sell a million units .
Later , the Am486 was used by a number of large original equipment manufacturers , including Compaq , and proved popular .
Another Am486-based product , the Am5x86 , continued AMD 's success as a low-price alternative .
However , as product cycles shortened in the PC industry , the process of reverse engineering Intel 's products became an ever less viable strategy for AMD.
AMD 's first in-house x86 processor was the K5 , which was launched in 1996 .
( In comic books , the only substance which could harm Superman was Kryptonite , which was formed from radioactive pieces of his home planet , Krypton .
This is a reference to Intel 's hegemony over the market , i .e . , an anthropomorphization of them as Superman . )
The numeral " 5 " refers to the fifth processor generation , which Intel introduced as Pentium , because the US Trademark and Patent Office ruled that mere numbers could not be trademarked .
In 1996 , AMD purchased NexGen , specifically for the rights to their Nx series of x86-compatible processors .
AMD gave the NexGen design team their own building , left them alone , and gave them time and money to rework the Nx686 .
The result was the K6 processor , introduced in 1997 .
Although the K6 was based on Socket 7 , variants such as K6-3/450 were faster than Intel 's Pentium II ( sixth generation processor ) .
The K7 was AMD 's seventh-generation x86 processor , making its debut on June 23 , 1999 , under the brand name Athlon .
Unlike previous AMD processors , it could not be used on the same motherboards as Intel 's , due to licensing issues surrounding Intel 's Slot 1 connector , and instead used a Slot A connector , referenced to the Alpha processor bus .
The Duron was a lower-cost and limited version of the Athlon ( 64KB instead of 256KB L2 cache ) in a 462-pin socketed PGA ( socket A) or soldered directly onto the motherboard .
Sempron was released as a lower-cost Athlon XP , replacing Duron in the socket A PGA era .
It has since been migrated upward to all new sockets , up to AM3.
On October 9 , 2001 , the Athlon XP was released .
On February 10 , 2003 , the Athlon XP with 512KB L2 Cache was released .
The K8 was a major revision of the K7 architecture , with the most notable features being the addition of a 64-bit extension to the x86 instruction set ( called x86-64 , AMD64 , or x64 ) , the incorporation of an on-chip memory controller , and the implementation of an extremely high performance point-to-point interconnect called HyperTransport , as part of the Direct Connect Architecture .
The technology was initially launched as the Opteron server-oriented processor on April 22 , 2003 .
Shortly thereafter it was incorporated into a product for desktop PCs , branded Athlon 64 .
On April 21 , 2005 , AMD released the first dual core Opteron , an x86-based server CPU.
A month later , AMD released the Athlon 64 X2 , the first desktop-based dual core processor family .
In early May 2007 , AMD had abandoned the string "64 " in its dual-core desktop product branding , becoming Athlon X2 , downplaying the significance of 64-bit computing in its processors .
Upcoming updates involved some of the improvements to the microarchitecture , and a shift of target market from mainstream desktop systems to value dual-core desktop systems .
In 2008 , AMD started to release dual-core Sempron processors exclusively in China , branded as the Sempron 2000 series , with lower HyperTransport speed and smaller L2 cache .
Thus AMD completed its dual-core product portfolio for each market segment .
On September 10 , 2007 , AMD released the first K10 processors : nine quad-core Third Generation Opteron processors .
This was followed by the Phenom processor for desktop .
K10 processors came in dual-core , triple-core , and quad-core versions , with all cores on a single die .
AMD released a new platform , codenamed " Spider" , which utilized the new Phenom processor , as well as an R770 GPU and a 790 GX/FX chipset from the AMD 700 chipset series .
However , AMD built the Spider at 65nm , which was uncompetitive with Intel 's smaller and more power-efficient 45nm .
In January 2009 , AMD released a new processor line dubbed Phenom II , a refresh of the original Phenom built using the 45 nm process .
AMD 's new platform , codenamed “Dragon” , utilised the new Phenom II processor , and an ATI R770 GPU from the R700 GPU family , as well as a 790 GX/FX chipset from the AMD 700 chipset series .
The Phenom II came in dual-core , triple-core and quad-core variants , all using the same die , with cores disabled for the triple-core and dual-core versions .
The Phenom II resolved issues that the original Phenom had , including low clock speed , a small L3 cache and a Cool 'n'Quiet bug that decreased performance .
The Phenom II cost less but was not performance-competitive with Intel 's mid-to-high-range Core 2 Quads .
The Phenom II also enhanced the Phenom 's memory controller , allowing it to use DDR3 in a new native socket AM3 , while maintaining backwards compatibility with AM2+ , the socket used for the Phenom , and allowing the use of the DDR2 memory that was used with the platform .
In April 2010 , AMD released a new Phenom II hexa-core (6-core ) processor codenamed " Thuban " .
This was a totally new die based on the hexa-core “Istanbul” Opteron processor .
It included AMD 's “turbo core ” technology , which allows the processor to automatically switch from 6 cores to 3 faster cores when more pure speed is needed .
AMD 's Enthusiast platform , codenamed “Leo” , utilized the new Phenom II , a new chipset from the AMD 800 chipset series and an ATI “Cypress ” GPU from the Evergreen ( GPU family ) GPU series .
The Magny Cours and Lisbon server parts were released in 2010 .
The Magny Cours part came in 8 to 12 cores and the Lisbon part came in 4 and 6 core parts .
Magny Cours is focused on performance while the Lisbon part is focused on high performance per watt .
Magny Cours is an MCM ( Multi-Chip Module ) with two hexa-core “Istanbul” Opteron parts .
This will use a new G34 socket for dual and quad socket processors and thus will be marketed as Opteron 61xx series processors .
Lisbon uses C32 socket certified for dual socket use or single socket use only and thus will be marketed as Opteron 41xx processors .
Both will be built on a 45 nm SOI process .
After the merge between AMD and ATI , an initiative codenamed " Fusion " was announced that will merge a CPU and GPU on some of their mainstream chips , including a minimum 16 lane PCI Express link to accommodate external PCI Express peripherals , thereby eliminating the requirement of a northbridge chip completely from the motherboard .
The initiative will see some of the processing originally done on the CPU ( e .g .
floating-point unit operations ) moved to the GPU , which is better optimized for calculations such as floating-point unit calculations .
This is referred to by AMD as an accelerated processing unit ( APU) .
Llano is to be the second APU released , targeted at the mainstream market .
This will incorporate a CPU and GPU on the same die , as well as the northbridge functions , and labeled on AMD 's new timeline as using " Socket FM1" with DDR3 memory .
This will , however , not be based on the new bulldozer core and will in fact be similar to the current Phenom II " Deneb" processor serving as AMD 's high-end processor until the release of the new 32 nm parts .
On September 28 , 2011 , AMD said that the third quarter of 2011 wo n't have a 10 % revenue increase as AMD planned before , because of the manufacturing problem with the 32 nm Llano Fusion chips .
Bulldozer is AMD 's CPU codename for the second latest server and desktop processors released on October 12 , 2011 .
This family 15h microarchitecture is the successor to the family 10h ( K10 ) microarchitecture "M-SPACE" design methodology .
Bulldozer is designed from scratch , not a development of earlier processors .
The core is specifically aimed at 10-125 W TDP computing products .
AMD claims dramatic performance-per-watt efficiency improvements in high-performance computing ( HPC ) applications with Bulldozer cores .
While hopes were very high that Bulldozer would bring AMD to be performance competitive with arch rival Intel once more , most benchmarks were disappointing .
In some cases the new Bulldozer products were slower than the K10 model they were built to replace .
Hondo is AMD 's latest processor series used in Tablet computers .
Vishera is AMD 's current FX series processor lineup targeting the desktop performance market .
It uses 2nd generation Bulldozer-derived cores codenamed Piledriver .
Llano was AMD 's first APU built for laptops .
Jaguar is the latest x86 processor core from AMD aimed at the low-power/low-cost market .
Jaguar 's predecessor , Bobcat , was revealed during a speech from AMD executive vice-president Henri Richard in Computex 2007 and was put into production Q1 2011 .
One of the major supporters was executive vice-president Mario A. Rivas who felt it was difficult to compete in the x86 market with a single core optimized for the 10-100 W range and actively promoted the development of the simpler core with a target range of 1-10 watts .
In addition , it was believed that the core could migrate into the hand-held space if the power consumption can be reduced to less than 1 W.
AMD intends to release 64-bit ARM System on Chips ( SoC ) that will begin sampling in early 2014 and release later in the year .
They will be for use in servers as a low-power alternative to current x86 chips .
Their implementation using the ARM architecture is codenamed " Seattle" , based on the Cortex A57 core design ( ARMv8-A ) , and will contain 8 and 16 cores each .
They will include the proprietary SeaMicro " Freedom Fabric" , as well as support for 128 GB RAM , and ten gigabit Ethernet .
AMD 's portfolio of dedicated graphics processors includes product families and associated technologies aimed at the consumer , professional and high-performance computing markets .
AMD Catalyst is a collection of proprietary device drivers software available for most platforms , including Microsoft Windows , OS X , and Linux .
Linux users can also opt to use open-source drivers , whose development is assisted by AMD.
Hardware component companies which only provide proprietary drivers have always been urged by the free-software community to make their drivers free software , or at least provide the necessary documentation for the community to write their own drivers .
Since 2007 , the AMD has partly cooperated with the development of free graphics drivers , but have not made their Catalyst drivers free .
The programming specifications for a number of chipsets and features were published in several rounds .
This greatly changed their support of the development of free graphics drivers , as until that moment only unsupported free drivers existed .
Besides releasing the specifications , AMD also funded the development of new "open source " drivers , and has even hired some employees to actively work on free software drivers .
Before the launch of Athlon 64 processors in 2003 , AMD designed chipsets for their processors spanning the K6 and K7 processor generations .
The chipsets include the AMD-640 , AMD-751 and the AMD-761 chipsets .
The situation changed in 2003 with the release of Athlon 64 processors , and AMD chose not to further design its own chipsets for its desktop processors while opening the desktop platform to allow other firms to design chipsets .
This was the “Open Platform Management Architecture ” with ATI , VIA and SiS developing their own chipset for Athlon 64 processors and later Athlon 64 X2 and Athlon 64 FX processors , including the Quad FX platform chipset from Nvidia .
The initiative went further with the release of Opteron server processors as AMD stopped the design of server chipsets in 2004 after releasing the AMD-8111 chipset , and again opened the server platform for firms to develop chipsets for Opteron processors .
As of today , Nvidia and Broadcom are the sole designing firms of server chipsets for Opteron processors .
As the company completed the acquisition of ATI Technologies in 2006 , the firm gained the ATI design team for chipsets which previously designed the Radeon Xpress 200 and the Radeon Xpress 3200 chipsets .
AMD then renamed the chipsets for AMD processors under AMD branding ( for instance , the CrossFire Xpress 3200 chipset was renamed as AMD 580X CrossFire chipset ) .
In February 2007 , AMD announced the first AMD-branded chipset since 2004 with the release of the AMD 690G chipset ( previously under the development codename " RS690" ) , targeted at mainstream IGP computing .
It was the industry 's first to implement a HDMI 1.2 port on motherboards , shipping for more than a million units .
While ATI had aimed at releasing an Intel IGP chipset , the plan was scrapped and the inventories of Radeon Xpress 1250 ( codenamed " RS600" , sold under ATI brand ) was sold to two OEMs, Abit and ASRock .
Although AMD states the firm will still produce Intel chipsets , Intel had not granted the license of FSB to ATI.
On November 15 , 2007 , AMD announced a new chipset series portfolio , the AMD 7-Series chipsets , covering from enthusiast multi-graphics segment to value IGP segment , to replace the AMD 480/570/580 chipsets and AMD 690 series chipsets , marking AMD 's first enthusiast multi-graphics chipset .
Discrete graphics chipsets were launched on November 15 , 2007 as part of the codenamed " Spider " desktop platform , and IGP chipsets were launched at a later time in Spring 2008 as part of the codenamed " Cartwheel " platform .
AMD returned to the server chipsets market with the AMD 800S series server chipsets .
It includes support for up to six SATA 6.0 Gbit/s ports , the C6 power state , which is featured in Fusion processors and AHCI 1.2 with SATA FIS–based switching support .
This is a chipset family supporting Phenom processors and Quad FX enthusiast platform (890FX ) , IGP(890GX ) .
As of 2007 , AMD LIVE ! was a platform marketing initiative focusing the consumer electronics segment , with an Active TV initiative for streaming Internet videos from web video services such as YouTube , into AMD Live ! PC as well as connected digital TVs , together with a scheme for an ecosystem of certified peripherals for the ease of customers to identify peripherals for AMD LIVE ! systems for digital home experience , called " AMD LIVE ! Ready " .
The AMD Quad FX platform , being an extreme enthusiast platform , allows two processors to connect through HyperTransport , which is a similar setup to dual-processor ( 2P ) servers , excluding the use of buffered memory/registered memory DIMM modules , and a server motherboard , the current setup includes two Athlon 64 FX-70 series processors and a special motherboard .
AMD pushed the platform for the surging demands for what AMD calls "megatasking" , the ability to do more tasks on a single system .
The platform refreshes with the introduction of Phenom FX processors and the next-generation RD790 chipset , codenamed " "FASN8" " .
AMD 's first multi-processor server platform , codenamed " Fiorano" , consists of AMD SR5690 + SP5100 server chipsets , supporting 45 nm , codenamed " Shanghai " Socket F+ processors and registered DDR2 memory .
It was followed by the " Maranello " platform supporting 45 nm , codenamed " Istanbul" , Socket G34 processors with DDR3 memory .
On single-processor platform , the codenamed " Catalunya " platform consists of codenamed " Suzuka " 45 nm quad-core processor with AMD SR5580 + SP5100 chipset and DDR3 support .
AMD 's x86 virtualization extension to the 64-bit x86 architecture is named " AMD Virtualization" , also known by the abbreviation " AMD-V" , and is sometimes referred to by the code name " Pacifica" .
AMD processors using Socket AM2 , Socket S1 , and Socket F include AMD Virtualization support .
AMD Virtualization is also supported by release two ( 8200 , 2200 and 1200 series ) of the Opteron processors .
The third generation (8300 and 2300 series ) of Opteron processors will see an update in virtualization technology , specifically the Rapid Virtualization Indexing ( also known by the development name " Nested Page Tables " ) , alongside the tagged TLB and Device Exclusion Vector ( DEV ) .
AMD also promotes the " AMD I/O Virtualization Technology " ( also known as IOMMU) for I/O virtualization .
The AMD IOMMU specification has been updated to version 1.2.
The specification describes the use of a HyperTransport architecture .
Starting in 2007 , AMD , following Intel , began using codenames for its desktop platforms such as " Spider " or " Dragon " .
The platforms , unlike Intel 's approach , will refresh every year , putting focus on platform specialization .
The platform includes components as AMD processors , chipsets , ATI graphics and other features , but continued to the open platform approach , and welcome components from other vendors such as VIA , SiS , and Nvidia , as well as wireless product vendors .
Updates to the platform includes the implementation of IOMMU I/O Virtualization with 45 nm generation of processors , and the AMD 800 chipset series in 2009 .
In February 2002 , AMD acquired Alchemy Semiconductor for its Alchemy line of MIPS processors for the hand-held and portable media player markets .
On June 13 , 2006 , AMD officially announced that the line was to be transferred to Raza Microelectronics , Inc. , a designer of MIPS processors for embedded applications .
In August 2003 , AMD also purchased the Geode business which was originally the Cyrix MediaGX from National Semiconductor to augment its existing line of embedded x86 processor products .
During the second quarter of 2004 , it launched new low-power Geode NX processors based on the K7 Thoroughbred architecture with speeds of fanless processors and , and processor with fan , of TDP 25 W.
This technology is used in a variety of embedded systems ( Casino slot machines and customer kiosks for instance ) , several UMPC designs in Asia markets , as well as the OLPC XO-1 computer , an inexpensive laptop computer intended to be distributed to children in developing countries around the world .
The Geode LX processor was announced in 2005 and is said will continue to be available through 2015 .
For the past couple of years AMD has been introducing 64-bit processors into its embedded product line starting with the AMD Opteron processor .
Leveraging the high throughput enabled through HyperTransport and the Direct Connect Architecture these server class processors have been targeted at high end telecom and storage applications .
In 2007 AMD added the AMD Athlon , AMD Turion and Mobile AMD Sempron processors to its embedded product line .
Leveraging the same 64-bit instruction set and Direct Connect Architecture as the AMD Opteron but at lower power levels , these processors were well suited to a variety of traditional embedded applications .
Throughout 2007 and into 2008 AMD has continued to add both single-core Mobile AMD Sempron and AMD Athlon processors and dual-core AMD Athlon X2 and AMD Turion processors to its embedded product line and now offers embedded 64-bit solutions starting with 8W TDP Mobile AMD Sempron and AMD Athlon processors for fan-less designs up to multi-processor systems leveraging multi-core AMD Opteron processors all supporting longer than standard availability .
The ATI acquisition included the Imageon and Xilleon product lines .
In late 2008 , the entire handheld division was sold off to Qualcomm , who have since produced the Adreno series .
In April 2007 , AMD announced the release of the M690T integrated graphics chipset for embedded designs .
This enabled AMD to offer complete processor and chipset solutions targeted at embedded applications requiring high performance 3D and video such as emerging digital signage , kiosk and Point of Sale applications .
The M690T was followed by the M690E specifically for embedded applications which removed the TV output , which required Macrovision licensing for OEMs, and enabled native support for dual TMDS outputs , enabling dual independent DVI interfaces .
In 2008 , AMD announced the Radeon E2400 , the first discrete GPU in their embedded product line offering the same long term availability as their other embedded products .
That was followed in 2009 with the higher performance Radeon E4690 discrete GPU.
In 2009 , AMD announced their first BGA packaged e64 architecture processors , known as the ASB1 family .
In 2010 , AMD announced a second generation BGA platform referred to as ASB2 .
They also announced several new AM3 based processors with support for DDR3 memory .
In January 2011 , AMD Announced the AMD Embedded G-Series Accelerated Processing Unit .
The first Fusion family APU for embedded applications .
This announcement was followed by announcements for the high performance AMD Radeon E6760 and the value-conscious Radeon E6460 discrete GPUs .
These solutions all added support for DirectX 11 , OpenGL 4.1 and OpenCL 1.1 .
In May 2012 , AMD Announced the AMD Embedded R-Series Accelerated Processing Unit .
This family of products incorporates the Bulldozer CPU architecture , and Discrete-class AMD Radeon ™ HD 7000G Series graphics .
AMD Embedded solutions offer 5+ year product life .
Ever since the spin-off of AMD 's fabrication plants in early 2009 , GlobalFoundries has been responsible for producing AMD 's processors .
GlobalFoundries ' main microprocessor manufacturing facilities are located in Dresden , Germany .
Additionally , highly integrated microprocessors are manufactured in Taiwan made by third-party manufacturers under strict license from AMD. Between 2003 and 2005 , they constructed a second manufacturing plant ( 90 nm process SOI ) in the same complex in order to increase the number of chips they could produce , thus becoming more competitive with Intel .
The new plant was named " Fab 36" , in recognition of AMD 's 36 years of operation , and reached full production in mid-2007 .
Fab 36 was renamed to " Fab 1" during the spin-off of AMD 's manufacturing business during the creation of GlobalFoundries .
In July 2007 , AMD announced that they completed the conversion of Fab 1 Module 1 from to 65 nm .
They then shifted their focus to the 45 nm conversion .
AMD utilizes strategic industry partnerships to further its business interests as well as to rival Intel 's dominance and resources .
A partnership between AMD and Alpha Processor Inc. developed HyperTransport , a point-to-point interconnect standard which was turned over to an industry standards body for finalization .
It is now used in modern motherboards that are compatible with AMD processors .
AMD also formed a strategic partnership with IBM , under which AMD gained silicon on insulator ( SOI ) manufacturing technology , and detailed advice on 90 nm implementation .
AMD announced that the partnership would extend to 2011 for 32 nm and 22 nm fabrication-related technologies .
To facilitate processor distribution and sales , AMD is loosely partnered with end-user companies , such as HP , Compaq , ASUS , Acer , and Dell .
In 1993 , AMD established a 50-50 partnership with Fujitsu called FASL , and merged into a new company called FASL LLC in 2003 .
The joint venture went public under the name Spansion and ticker symbol SPSN in December 2005 , with AMD shares drop to 37 % .
AMD no longer directly participates in the Flash memory devices market now as AMD entered into a non-competition agreement , as of December 21 , 2005 , with Fujitsu and Spansion , pursuant to which it agreed not to directly or indirectly engage in a business that manufactures or supplies standalone semiconductor devices ( including single chip , multiple chip or system devices ) containing only Flash memory .
On May 18 , 2006 , Dell announced that it would roll out new servers based on AMD 's Opteron chips by year 's end , thus ending an exclusive relationship with Intel .
In September 2006 , Dell began offering AMD Athlon X2 chips in their desktop line-up .
Since 2002 , AMD has been a sponsor of the Scuderia Ferrari Marlboro F1 Team .
Since 2004 , AMD has been a sponsor of the Discovery Channel Pro Cycling Team .
In 2009 , AMD became the jersey sponsor of the USL expansion team Austin Aztex FC.
In June 2011 , HP announced new business and consumer notebooks equipped with the latest versions of AMD APUsaccelerated processing units .
AMD will power HP 's Intel-based business notebooks as well .
In the spring of 2013 , AMD announced that it would be powering all three major next-generation consoles .
The Xbox One and Sony PlayStation 4 are both powered by a custom-built AMD APU , and the Nintendo Wii U is powered by an AMD GPU.
According to AMD , having their processors in all three of these consoles will greatly assist developers with cross-platform development to competing consoles and PCs as well as increased support for their products across the board .
AMD has a long history of litigation with former partner and x86 creator Intel .
Although AMD frequently refuses to provide information about upcoming products and plans , it does hold annual Analyst Days to reveal and explain key future technologies , and to present official technology roadmaps .
The event held in mid-year is referred to as " Technology Analyst Day" , with its main focus on upcoming technologies and trends .
The end-of-year event is referred to as " Financial Analyst Day " and focuses on the financial performance of the company through the previous year .
In addition to these events , AMD also publishes printed media .
Publications include the AMD Accelerate and the discontinued AMDEdge .
The AMD Accelerate magazine , originally published through Ziff Davis Media , focuses on SME and business applications , while AMD Edge focused on overall technologies from AMD.
Since Ziff Davis Media filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection , the AMD Accelerate magazine has been published through IDG.
AMD also has electronic newsletters to promote its server-oriented Opteron processors and related business solutions .
On August 31 , 2011 , in Austin , Texas , AMD achieved a Guinness World Record for the " Highest frequency of a computer processor " : 8.429 GHz .
The company ran an 8-core FX-8150 processor with only one active module ( two cores ) , and cooled with liquid helium.During the video , cooling transitions from air to water to liquid nitrogen and finally to liquid helium .</ref>
The previous record was 8.308 GHz , with an Intel Celeron 352 ( one core ) .
On November 1 , 2011 , geek .com reported that Andre Yang , an overclocker from Taiwan , used an FX-8150 to set another record : 8.461 GHz .
In its 2012 report on progress relating to conflict minerals , the Enough Project rated AMD the fifth most progressive of 24 consumer electronics companies .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
The House of Ascania ( ) is a dynasty of German rulers .
It is also known as the House of Anhalt , after Anhalt , its longest-held possession .
The Ascanians are named after Ascania ( or Ascaria ) Castle , " Schloss Askanien" , which is located near and named after Aschersleben .
The castle was seat of the County of Ascania , a title that was later subsumed into the titles of the princes of Anhalt .
The earliest known member of the house , Esiko , Count of Ballenstedt , first appears in a document of 1036 , and is assumed to have been a grandson ( through his mother ) of Odo I , Margrave of the Saxon Ostmark .
From Odo , the Ascanians inherited large properties in the Saxon Eastern March .
Esiko 's grandson was Otto , Count of Ballenstedt , who died in 1123 .
By Otto 's marriage to Eilika , daughter of Magnus , Duke of Saxony , the Ascanians became heirs to half of the property of the House of Billung , former dukes of Saxony .
Otto 's son , Albert the Bear , became , with the help of his mother 's inheritance , the first Ascanian duke of Saxony in 1139 .
But he lost control of Saxony soon to the rival House of Guelph .
However , Albert inherited the Margraviate of Brandenburg from its last Wendish ruler , Pribislav , in 1157 , and became the first Ascanian margrave .
Albert , and his descendants of the House of Ascania , then made considerable progress in Christianizing and Germanizing the lands .
As a borderland between German and Slavic cultures , the country was known as a march .
In 1237 and 1244 two towns , Cölln and Berlin were founded during the rule of Otto and Johann , grandsons of Margrave Albert the Bear , ( later they were united into one city , Berlin ) .
The emblem of the House of Ascania , red eagle and bear , became the heraldic emblems of Berlin .
In 1320 the Brandenburg Ascanian line came to an end .
After the Emperor had deposed the Guelph rulers of Saxony in 1180 , Ascanians returned to rule the Duchy of Saxony , which had been reduced to its eastern half by the Emperor .
However , even in eastern Saxony , the Ascanians could establish control only in limited areas , mostly near the River Elbe .
In the 13th century , the Principality of Anhalt was split off from the Duchy , and later , the remaining state was split into Saxe-Lauenburg and Saxe-Wittenberg .
The Ascanian dynasties in the two Saxon states became extinct in 1689 and in 1422 , respectively , but Ascanians continued to rule in the smaller state of Anhalt and its various subdivisions until monarchy was abolished in 1918 .
Catherine the Great , Empress of Russia from 1762–1796 , was a member of the House of Ascania , herself the daughter of Christian August , Prince of Anhalt-Zerbst .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
The " Arc de Triomphe de l'Étoile " is one of the most famous monuments in Paris .
It stands in the centre of the " Place Charles de Gaulle " (originally named " Place de l'Étoile " ) , at the western end of the " Champs-Élysées " .
It should not be confused with a smaller arch , the " Arc de Triomphe du Carrousel" , which stands west of the Louvre .
The " Arc de Triomphe " ( in English : " Triumphal Arch" ) honours those who fought and died for France in the French Revolutionary and the Napoleonic Wars , with the names of all French victories and generals inscribed on its inner and outer surfaces .
Beneath its vault lies the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier from World War I.
The " Arc de Triomphe " is the linchpin of the historic axis ( " Axe historique " ) – a sequence of monuments and grand thoroughfares on a route which goes from the courtyard of the Louvre , to the Grande Arche de la Défense .
The monument was designed by Jean Chalgrin in 1806 , and its iconographic program pitted heroically nude French youths against bearded Germanic warriors in chain mail .
It set the tone for public monuments , with triumphant patriotic messages .
The monument stands in height , wide and deep .
Its design was inspired by the Roman Arch of Titus .
The " Arc de Triomphe " is built on such a large scale that , three weeks after the Paris victory parade in 1919 ( marking the end of hostilities in World War I ) , Charles Godefroy flew his Nieuport biplane through it , with the event captured on newsreel .
It was the tallest triumphal arch in existence until the completion of the Monumento a la Revolución in Mexico City in 1938 , which is high .
However , the Arch of Triumph in Pyongyang , completed in 1982 , is modelled on the " Arc de Triomphe " although slightly taller at .
The Arc is located on the right bank of the Seine at the centre of a dodecagonal configuration of twelve radiating avenues .
It was commissioned in 1806 after the victory at Austerlitz by Emperor Napoleon at the peak of his fortunes .
Laying the foundations alone took two years and , in 1810 , when Napoleon entered Paris from the west with his bride Archduchess Marie-Louise of Austria , he had a wooden mock-up of the completed arch constructed .
The architect , Jean Chalgrin , died in 1811 and the work was taken over by Jean-Nicolas Huyot .
During the Bourbon Restoration , construction was halted and it would not be completed until the reign of King Louis-Philippe , between 1833 and 1836 , by the architects Goust , then Huyot , under the direction of Héricart de Thury .
On 15 December 1840 , brought back to France from Saint Helena , Napoleon 's remains passed under it on their way to the Emperor 's final resting place at the Invalides .
Prior to burial in the Panthéon , the body of Victor Hugo was exposed under the Arc during the night of 22 May 1885 .
The sword carried by the " Republic " in the " Marseillaise " relief broke off on the day , it is said , that the Battle of Verdun began in 1916 .
The relief was immediately hidden by tarpaulins to conceal the accident and avoid any undesired ominous interpretations .
On 7 August 1919 , Charles Godefroy successfully flew his biplane under the Arc .
Jean Navarre was the pilot who was tasked to make the flight , but he died on 10 July 1919 when he crashed near Villacoublay while training for the flight .
Following its construction , the " Arc de Triomphe " became the rallying point of French troops parading after successful military campaigns and for the annual Bastille Day Military Parade .
Famous victory marches around or under the Arc have included the Germans in 1871 , the French in 1919 , the Germans in 1940 , and the French and Allies in 1944 and 1945 .
A United States postage stamp of 1945 shows the " Arc de Triomphe " in the background as victorious American troops march down the Champs-Élysées and U.S. airplanes fly overhead on 29 August 1944 .
After the interment of the Unknown Soldier , however , all military parades ( including the aforementioned post-1919 ) have avoided marching through the actual arch .
The route taken is up to the arch and then around its side , out of respect for the tomb and its symbolism .
Both Hitler in 1940 and de Gaulle in 1944 observed this custom .
By the early 1960s , the monument had grown very blackened from coal soot and automobile exhaust , and during 1965–1966 it was cleaned through bleaching .
In the prolongation of the Avenue des Champs-Élysées , a new arch , the Grande Arche de la Défense , was built in 1982 , completing the line of monuments that forms Paris 's " Axe historique " .
After the " Arc de Triomphe du Carrousel " and the " Arc de Triomphe de l'Étoile" , the " Grande Arche " is the third arch built on the same perspective .
The astylar design is by Jean Chalgrin ( 1739–1811 ) , in the Neoclassical version of ancient Roman architecture ( see , for example , the triumphal Arch of Titus ) .
Major academic sculptors of France are represented in the sculpture of the " Arc de Triomphe" : Jean-Pierre Cortot ; François Rude ; Antoine Étex ; James Pradier and Philippe Joseph Henri Lemaire .
The main sculptures are not integral friezes but are treated as independent trophies applied to the vast ashlar masonry masses , not unlike the gilt-bronze appliqués on Empire furniture .
The four sculptural groups at the base of the Arc are " The Triumph of 1810 " ( Cortot ) , " Resistance " and " Peace " ( both by Antoine Étex ) and the most renowned of them all , " Departure of the Volunteers of 1792 " commonly called " La Marseillaise " ( François Rude ) .
The face of the allegorical representation of France calling forth her people on this last was used as the belt buckle for the honorary rank of Marshal of France .
Since the fall of Napoleon ( 1815 ) , the sculpture representing " Peace " is interpreted as commemorating the " Peace of 1815" .
In the attic above the richly sculptured frieze of soldiers are 30 shields engraved with the names of major Revolutionary and Napoleonic military victories .
The inside walls of the monument list the names of 660 people , among which are 558 French generals of the First French Empire ; the names of those who died in battle are underlined .
Also inscribed , on the shorter sides of the four supporting columns , are the names of the major victorious battles of the Napoleonic Wars .
The battles that took place in the period between the departure of Napoleon from Elba to his final defeat at Waterloo are not included .
There was at the top of the Arc from 1882 to 1886 , a monumental sculpture by Alexandre Falguière , " Le triomphe de la Révolution " ( the Triumph of the Revolution ) , a chariot drawn by horses preparing " to crush Anarchy and Despotism" , that remained only four years up there before falling in ruins .
Inside the monument , a new permanent exhibition conceived by the artist Maurice Benayoun and the architect Christophe Girault opened in February 2007 .
The steel and new media installation interrogates the symbolism of the national monument , questioning the balance of its symbolic message during the last two centuries , oscillating between war and peace .
Beneath the Arc is the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier from World War I. Interred here on Armistice Day 1920 , it has the first eternal flame lit in Western and Eastern Europe since the Vestal Virgins ' fire was extinguished in the fourth century .
It burns in memory of the dead who were never identified ( now in both world wars ) .
A ceremony is held at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier every 11 November on the anniversary of the armistice signed between France and Germany in 1918 .
It was originally decided on 12 November 1919 to bury the unknown soldier 's remains in the Panthéon , but a public letter-writing campaign led to the decision to bury him beneath the Arc de Triomphe .
The coffin was put in the chapel on the first floor of the Arc on 10 November 1920 , and put in its final resting place on 28 January 1921 .
The slab on top carries the inscription ICI REPOSE UN SOLDAT FRANÇAIS MORT POUR LA PATRIE 1914–1918 ( " Here lies a French soldier who died for the fatherland 1914–1918" ) .
In 1961 , President John F. Kennedy and First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy of the United States paid their respects at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier , accompanied by French President Charles de Gaulle .
After the 1963 assassination of President Kennedy , Mrs Kennedy remembered the eternal flame at the Arc de Triomphe and requested that an eternal flame be placed next to her husband 's grave at Arlington National Cemetery in Virginia .
President Charles de Gaulle went to Washington to attend the state funeral , and witnessed Jacqueline Kennedy lighting the eternal flame that had been inspired by her visit to France .
The " Arc de Triomphe " is accessible by the RER and Métro , with exit at the Charles de Gaulle—Étoile station .
Because of heavy traffic on the roundabout of which the Arc is the centre , it is recommended that pedestrians use one of two underpasses located at the " Champs Élysées " and the " Avenue de la Grande Armée " .
A lift will take visitors almost to the top – to the attic , where there is a small museum which contains large models of the Arc and tells its story from the time of its construction .
46 steps remain to climb in order to reach the top , the "terrasse" , from where one can enjoy a panoramic view of Paris .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Saint Ansgar ( 8 September 801 – 3 February 865 ) , also known as Saint Anschar , was an Archbishop of Hamburg-Bremen .
The see of Hamburg was designated a mission to bring Christianity to Northern Europe , and Ansgar became known as the " Apostle of the North" .
Ansgar was the son of a noble family , born near Amiens .
After his mother’s early death , Ansgar was brought up in Corbie Abbey , and made rapid progress in his education .
According to the " Vita Ansgarii " ( " Life of Ansgar " ) , when the little boy learned in a vision that his mother was in the company of Saint Mary , his careless attitude toward spiritual matters changed to seriousness ( " Life of Ansgar" , 1 ) .
His pupil , successor , and eventual biographer Rimbert considered the visions of which this was the first to be the main motivation of the saint 's life .
Ansgar was a product of the phase of Christianization of Saxony ( present day Northern Germany ) begun by Charlemagne and continued by his son and successor , Louis the Pious .
When Saxony was no longer the focus of Christianization , what is now Denmark fell under the sweeping missionary gaze , with a group of monks including Ansgar sent back to Jutland with the baptized exiled king Harald Klak .
Ansgar returned two years later after educating young boys who had been purchased because Harald had possibly been driven out of his kingdom .
In 822 Ansgar was one of a number of missionaries sent to found the abbey of Corvey ( New Corbie ) in Westphalia , and there became a teacher and preacher .
Then in 829 in response to a request from the Swedish king Björn at Hauge for a mission to the Swedes , Louis appointed Ansgar missionary .
With an assistant , the friar Witmar , he preached and made converts for six months at Birka , on Lake Mälaren .
They organized a small congregation there with the king 's steward , Hergeir , as its most prominent member .
In 831 he returned to Louis ' court at Worms and was appointed to the Archbishopric of Hamburg .
This was a new archbishopric with a see formed from those of Bremen and Verden , plus the right to send missions into all the northern lands and to consecrate bishops for them .
Ansgar was consecrated in November 831 , and , the arrangements having been at once approved by Gregory IV , he went to Rome to receive the pallium directly from the hands of the pope and to be named legate for the northern lands .
This commission had previously been bestowed upon Ebbo , Archbishop of Reims , but the jurisdiction was divided by agreement , with Ebbo retaining Sweden for himself .
For a time Ansgar devoted himself to the needs of his own diocese , which was still missionary territory with but a few churches .
He founded a monastery and a school in Hamburg ; the school was intended to serve the Danish mission , but accomplished little .
After Louis died in 840 , his empire was divided and Ansgar lost the abbey of Turholt , which had been given as an endowment for his work .
Then in 845 , the Danes unexpectedly raided Hamburg , destroying all the church 's treasures and books and leaving the entire diocese unrestorable .
Many of his helpers deserted him , but the new king , Louis the German , came to his aid ; after failing to recover Turholt for him , in 847 he awarded him the vacant diocese of Bremen , where he took up residence in 848 .
However , since Hamburg had been an archbishopric , the sees of Bremen and Hamburg were combined for him .
This presented canonical difficulties and also aroused the anger of the Bishop of Cologne , to whom Bremen had been suffragan , but after prolonged negotiations , Pope Nicholas I approved the union of the two dioceses in 864 .
Through all this political turmoil , Ansgar continued his mission to the northern lands .
The Danish civil war compelled him to establish good relations with two kings , Horik the Elder and his son , Horik II .
Both assisted him until his death ( Wood , 124-125 ) .
He was able to secure recognition of Christianity as a tolerated religion and permission to build a church in Sleswick .
He did not forget the Swedish mission , and spent two years there in person ( 848-850 ) , at the critical moment when a pagan reaction was threatened , which he succeeded in averting .
According to Rimbert , he was well disposed to Christianity .
On a Viking raid to Apuole ( current village in Lithuania ) in Courland , the Swedes prayed , and with God 's help they plundered the Curonians
Ansgar died and was buried in Bremen in 865 .
His life story was written by his successor as archbishop , Rimbert , in the " Vita Ansgarii" .
Although a historical document and primary source written by a man whose existence can be proven historically , the " Vita Ansgarii " ( " The Life of Ansgar " ) aims above all to demonstrate Ansgar 's sanctity .
It is partly concerned with Ansgar 's visions , which , according to the author Rimbert , encouraged and assisted Ansgar 's remarkable missionary feats .
Through the course of this work , Ansgar repeatedly embarks on a new stage in his career following a vision .
According to Rimbert , his early studies and ensuing devotion to the ascetic life of a monk were inspired by a vision of his mother in the presence of Saint Mary .
Again , when the Swedish people were left without a priest for some time , he begged King Horik to help him with this problem ; then after receiving his consent , consulted with Bishop Gautbert to find a suitable man .
The two together sought the approval of King Louis , which he granted when he learned that they were in agreement on the issue .
Ansgar was convinced he was commanded by heaven to undertake this mission , and was influenced by a vision he received when he was concerned about the journey , in which he met a man who reassured him of his purpose and informed him of a prophet that he would meet , the abbot Adalhard , who would instruct him in what was to happen .
In the vision , he searched for and found Adalhard , who commanded , " Islands , listen to me , pay attention , remotest peoples " , which Ansgar interpreted as God’s will that he go to the Scandinavian countries as "most of that country consisted of islands , and also , when ' I will make you the light of the nations so that my salvation may reach to the ends of the earth ' was added , since the end of the world in the north was in Swedish territory " .
Statues dedicated to him stand in Hamburg and Copenhagen as well as a stone cross at Birka .
A crater on the Moon , Ansgarius , has been named for him .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Arapawa Island is a small island located in the Marlborough Sounds , at the north east tip of the South Island of New Zealand .
Queen Charlotte Sound defines its western side , while to the south lies Tory Channel , which is on the sea route from Wellington in the North Island to Picton .
It was from a hill on Arapawa Island in 1770 that Captain James Cook first saw the sea passage from the Pacific Ocean to the Tasman Sea , which was named Cook Strait .
This discovery banished the fond notion of geographers that there existed a great southern continent , Terra Australis .
A monument at Cook 's Lookout was erected in 1970 .
From the late 1820s until the mid-1960s , Arapawa Island was a base for whaling in the Sounds .
John Guard established a shore station at Te Awaiti in 1827 for right whales .
Later , the station at Perano Head on the east coast of the island was used to hunt humpback whales from 1911 to 1964 ( see Whaling in New Zealand ) .
The houses built by the Perano family are now operated as tourist accommodations .
An elevated power cable from the mainland to Arapawa Island over Tory Channel was struck by an Air Albatross Cessna 402 commuter aircraft in 1985 .
The crash was witnessed by many passengers on an inter-island Cook Strait ferry .
The ferry immediately stopped to dispatch a rescue lifeboat .
Along with the two pilots , one entire family was lost , and all but a young girl from the other .
The sole survivor ( Cindy Mosey ) was travelling with her family and the other from Nelson to Wellington to attend a gymnastics competition .
The Arapawa Island crash caused public confidence in Air Albatross to falter , contributing to the company going into liquidation in December of that year .
Parts of the island have been heavily cleared of native vegetation in the past through burning and logging , A number of pine forests were planted on the island .
Wilding pines , an invasive species in some parts of New Zealand , are being poisoned on the island to allow the regenerating native vegetation to grow .
About at Ruaomoko Point on the south-eastern portion of the island will be killed by drilling holes into the trees and injecting poison .
Arapawa Island is known for the breeds of pigs , sheep and goats found only on the island .
These became established in the 19th century , but the origin of these breeds is uncertain , and a matter of some speculation .
Common suggestions are that they are old English breeds introduced by the early whalers , or by Captain Cook or other early explorers .
These breeds are now extinct in England , and the goats surviving in a sanctuary on the island are now also bred in other parts of New Zealand and in the northern hemisphere .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
" Not to be confused with the asteroid called 5 Astraea "
Adrastea ( ; ) , also known as , is the second by distance , and the smallest of the four inner moons of Jupiter .
It was discovered in " Voyager 2" probe photographs taken in 1979 , making it the first natural satellite to be discovered from images taken by an interplanetary spacecraft , rather than through a telescope .
It was officially named after the mythological Adrasteia , foster mother of the Greek god Zeus—the equivalent of the Roman god Jupiter .
Adrastea is one of the few moons in the Solar System known to orbit its planet in less than the length of that planet 's day .
It orbits at the edge of Jupiter 's Main Ring and is thought to be the main contributor of material to the Rings of Jupiter .
Despite observations made in the 1990s by the Galileo spacecraft , very little is known about the moon 's physical characteristics other than its size and the fact that it is tidally locked to Jupiter .
Adrastea was discovered by David C. Jewitt and G. Edward Danielson in " Voyager 2" probe photographs taken on July 8 , 1979 , and received the designation .
Although it appeared only as a dot , it was the first moon to be discovered by an interplanetary spacecraft .
Soon after its discovery , two other of the inner moons of Jupiter ( Thebe and Metis ) were observed in the images taken a few weeks earlier by " Voyager 1" .
The " Galileo " spacecraft was able to determine the moon 's shape in 1998 , but the images remain poor .
In 1983 , Adrastea was officially named after the Greek nymph Adrastea , the daughter of Zeus and his lover Ananke .
Adrastea has an irregular shape and measures 20×16×14 km across .
A surface area estimate would be between 840 and 1,600 ( ~1,200 ) km2 .
This makes it the smallest of the four inner moons .
The bulk , composition and mass of Adrastea are not known , but assuming that its mean density is like that of Amalthea , around 0.86 g/cm³ , its mass can be estimated at about 2 kg .
Amalthea 's density implies that the moon is composed of water ice with a porosity of 10–15 % , and Adrastea may be similar .
No surface details of Adrastea are known , due to the low resolution of available images .
Adrastea is the smallest and second closest member of the inner Jovian satellite family .
It orbits Jupiter at a radius of about 129,000 km ( 1.806 Jupiter radii ) at the exterior edge of the planet 's Main Ring .
Adrastea is one of only three moons in the Solar System known to orbit its planet in less than the length of that planet 's day—the other two being Jupiter 's innermost moon Metis , and Mars ' moon Phobos .
The orbit has very small eccentricity and inclination—around 0.0015 and 0.03° , respectively .
Inclination is relative to the equator of Jupiter .
Due to tidal locking , Adrastea rotates synchronously with its orbital period , keeping one face always looking toward the planet .
Its long axis is aligned towards Jupiter , this being the lowest energy configuration .
The orbit of Adrastea lies inside Jupiter 's synchronous orbit radius ( as does Metis’s ) , and as a result , tidal forces are slowly causing its orbit to decay so that it will one day impact Jupiter .
If its density is similar to Amalthea 's then its orbit would actually lie within the fluid Roche limit .
However , since it is not breaking up , it must still lie outside its rigid Roche limit .
Adrastea is the largest contributor to material in Jupiter 's rings .
This appears to consist primarily of material that is ejected from the surfaces of Jupiter 's four small inner satellites by meteorite impacts .
It is easy for the impact ejecta to be lost from these satellites into space .
This is due to the satellites ' low density and their surfaces lying close to the edge of their Roche spheres .
It seems that Adrastea is the most copious source of this ring material , as evidenced by the densest ring ( the Main Ring ) being located at and within Adrastea 's orbit .
More precisely , the orbit of Adrastea lies near the outer edge of Jupiter 's Main Ring .
The exact extent of visible ring material depends on the phase angle of the images : in forward-scattered light Adrastea is firmly outside the Main Ring , but in back-scattered light ( which reveals much bigger particles ) there appears to also be a narrow ringlet outside Adrastea 's orbit .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
The Apache HTTP Server , commonly referred to as Apache ( ) , is a web server application notable for playing a key role in the initial growth of the World Wide Web.
Originally based on the NCSA HTTPd server , development of Apache began in early 1995 after work on the NCSA code stalled .
Apache quickly overtook NCSA HTTPd as the dominant HTTP server , and has remained the most popular HTTP server in use since April 1996 .
In 2009 , it became the first web server software to serve more than 100 million websites .
Apache is developed and maintained by an open community of developers under the auspices of the Apache Software Foundation .
Most commonly used on a Unix-like system , the software is available for a wide variety of operating systems , including Unix , FreeBSD , Linux , Solaris , Novell NetWare , OS X , Microsoft Windows , OS/2 , TPF , OpenVMS and eComStation .
Released under the Apache License , Apache is open-source software .
, Apache was estimated to serve 54.2 % of all active websites and 53.3 % of the top servers across all domains .
According to the FAQ in the Apache project website , the name Apache was chosen out of respect to the Native American tribe Apache and its superior skills in warfare and strategy .
The name was widely believed to be a pun on A Patchy Server ( since it was a set of software patches ) , but this is erroneous .
Official documentation used to give this very explanation of the name , but in a 2000 interview , Brian Behlendorf , one of the creators of Apache , set the record straight :
Apache supports a variety of features , many implemented as compiled modules which extend the core functionality .
These can range from server-side programming language support to authentication schemes .
Some common language interfaces support Perl , Python , Tcl , and PHP.
Popular authentication modules include mod_access , mod_auth , mod_digest , and mod_auth_digest , the successor to mod_digest .
A sample of other features include Secure Sockets Layer and Transport Layer Security support ( mod_ssl ) , a proxy module ( mod_proxy ) , a URL rewriter ( mod_rewrite ) , custom log files ( mod_log_config ) , and filtering support ( mod_include and mod_ext_filter ) .
Popular compression methods on Apache include the external extension module , mod_gzip , implemented to help with reduction of the size ( weight ) of web pages served over HTTP.
ModSecurity is an open source intrusion detection and prevention engine for web applications .
Apache logs can be analyzed through a web browser using free scripts such as AWStats/W3Perl or Visitors .
Virtual hosting allows one Apache installation to serve many different websites .
For example , one machine with one Apache installation could simultaneously serve www.example .com ,
Apache features configurable error messages , DBMS-based authentication databases , and content negotiation .
It is also supported by several graphical user interfaces ( GUIs ) .
It supports password authentication and digital certificate authentication .
Because the source code is freely available , anyone can adapt the server for specific needs , and there is a large public library of Apache add-ons .
Instead of implementing a single architecture , Apache provides a variety of MultiProcessing Modules ( MPMs) which allow Apache to run in a process-based , hybrid ( process and thread ) or event-hybrid mode , to better match the demands of each particular infrastructure .
This implies that the choice of correct MPM and the correct configuration is important .
Where compromises in performance need to be made , the design of Apache is to reduce latency and increase throughput , relative to simply handling more requests , thus ensuring consistent and reliable processing of requests within reasonable time-frames .
For static pages delivery , Apache 2.2 series was considered significantly slower than nginx .
To address this issue , the Apache version considered by the Apache Foundation as providing high-performance is the multi-threaded version which mixes the use of several processes and several threads per process .
This architecture , and the way it was implemented in the Apache 2.4 series , provides for performance equivalent or slightly better than event-based webservers , as it claimed by President of the Apache Foundation , Jim Jagielski .
However , some independent benchmarks show that it still twice slower than nginx .
The Apache HTTP Server codebase was relicensed to the Apache 2.0 License ( from the previous 1.1 license ) in January 2004 , and Apache HTTP Server 1.3.31
were the first releases using the new license .
The OpenBSD project did not like the change and continued the use of pre-2.0
The Apache HTTP Server Project is a collaborative software development effort aimed at creating a robust , commercial-grade , feature-rich and freely-available source code implementation of an HTTP ( Web) server .
The project is jointly managed by a group of volunteers located around the world , using the Internet and the Web to communicate , plan , and develop the server and its related documentation .
This project is part of the Apache Software Foundation .
In addition , hundreds of users have contributed ideas , code , and documentation to the project .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
In law , affiliation ( from Latin "ad-filiare" , to adopt as a son ) is the term to describe a partnership between two or more parties .
In England a number of statutes on the subject have been passed , the chief being the Bastardy Act of the Parliament of 1845 , and the Bastardy Laws Amendment Acts of 1872 and 1873 .
The mother of a bastard may summon the putative father to petty sessions within 12 months of the birth ( or at any later time if he is proved to have contributed to the child 's support within 12 months after the birth ) , and the justices , as after hearing evidence on both sides , may , if the mother 's evidence be corroborated in some material particular , adjudge the man to be the putative father ] of the child , and order him to pay a sum not exceeding five shillings a week for its maintenance , together with a sum for expenses incidental to the birth , or the funeral expenses , if it has died before the date of order , and the costs of the proceedings .
ceases to be valid after the child reaches the age of 13 , but the justices ( also referred to as
Gold writers under these circumstances ) may in the order direct the payments to be continued until the child is 16 years of age .
An appeal to quarter sessions is open to the defendant , and a further appeal on questions of law to the King 's Bench by rule "nisi or certiorari" .
Should the child afterwards become chargeable to the parish , the sum due by the father may be received by the parish officer .
When a bastard child , whose mother has not obtained an order , becomes chargeable to the parish , the guardians may proceed against the putative father for a contribution .
Any woman who is single , a widow , or a married woman living apart from her husband , may make an application for a summons , and it is immaterial where the child is begotten , provided it is born in England .
An application for a summons may be made before the birth of the child , but in this case the statement of the mother must be in the form of a sworn deposition .
The defendant must be over 14 years of age .
No agreement on the part of the woman to take a sum down in discharge of the liability of the father is a bar to the making of an affiliation order .
In the case of twins it is usual to make separate applications and obtain separate summonses .
The Summary Jurisdiction Act ( 1879 ) makes due provision for the enforcement of an order of affiliation .
In the case of soldiers an affiliation order cannot be enforced in the usual way , but by the Army Act ( 1881 ) , if an order has been made against a soldier of the regular forces , and a copy of such order be sent to the secretary of state , he may order a portion of the soldier 's pay to be retained .
There is no such special legislation with regard to sailors in the Royal Navy .
In the British colonies , and in the states of the United States ( with the (usually termed filiation ) akin to that described above , by means of which a mother can obtain a contribution to the support of her illegitimate child from the putative father .
The amount ordered to be paid may subsequently be increased or diminished ( 1905 ; 94 N.Y .
On the continent of Europe , however , the legislation of the various countries differs rather widely .
France , Belgium , the Netherlands , Italy , Russia , Serbia and the canton of Geneva provide no means of inquiry into the paternity of an illegitimate child , and consequently all support of the child falls upon the mother ; on the other hand , Germany , Austria , Norway , Sweden , Denmark and the majority of the Swiss cantons provide for an inquiry into the paternity of illegitimate children , and the law casts a certain amount of responsibility upon the father .
Affiliation , in France , is a term applied to a species of adoption by which the person adopted succeeds equally with other heirs to the acquired , but not to the inherited , property of the deceased .
In India , affiliation cases are decided by section 125 of Criminal Procedure Code ( Cr.P.C. ) .
According to this section - among other things - if a person having sufficient means neglects or refuses to maintain his illegitimate child , a magistrate of the first class may , upon proof of such neglect or refusal , order such person to make a monthly allowance for the maintenance of such child .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Abiathar ( אביתר , Ebyathar , Evyatar , " the father is pre-eminent " or "father of plenty " ) , in the Hebrew Bible , son of Ahimelech or Ahijah , High Priest at Nob , the fourth in descent from Eli ( 1 Sam .
The only one of the priests to escape from Saul 's massacre , he fled to David at Keilah , taking with him the ephod and other priestly regalies ( 1 Sam .
He was of great service to David , especially at the time of the rebellion of Absalom ( 2 Sam .
In 1 Kings 4:4 Zadok and Abiathar are found acting together as priests under Solomon .
In 1 Kings 1:7 , 19 , 25 , however , Abiathar appears as a supporter of Adonijah , and in 2:22 and 26 it is said that he was deposed by Solomon and banished to Anathoth .
8:17 " Abiathar , the son of Achimelech " should be read , with the Syriac , for " Achimelech , the son of Abiathar . "
A similar confusion occurs in Gospel of Mark 2:26 : in reporting Jesus ' words , the evangelist used the name Abiathar when we might expect to see Jesus mention his father Ahimelech .
Suggestions made to resolve the difficulty — e.g . that father and son each bore the same double name , or that Abiathar officiated during his father 's lifetime and in his father 's stead—have been supported by great names , but have not been fully accepted .
When his father and the priests of Nob were slain on the command of Saul , Abiathar escaped , bearing with him the ephod .
Rabbinical literature that linked the later extermination of the male descendants of David with the priests of Nob , also link the survival of David 's descendant Joash with that of Abiathar .
Abiathar joined David , who was then in the cave of Adullam ( 1 Sam .
He remained with David , and became priest of the party of which he was the leader ( 1 Sam .
When David ascended the throne of Judah , Abiathar was appointed High Priest ( 1 Chr .
15 :11 ; 1 Kings 2:26 ) and the "king 's counselor " ( 1 Chr .
Meanwhile Zadok , of the house of Eleazar , had been made High Priest .
According to the Jewish Encyclopedia Abiathar was deposed from office when he was deserted by the Holy Spirit without which the Urim and Thummin could not be consulted .
Another version says he was Co-Pontiff with Zadok during King David .
He supported Prince Adonijah over Prince Solomon , and was deposed by him and exiled in Anathoth .
These appointments continued in force till the end of David 's reign ( 1 Kings 4:4) .
Abiathar was deposed ( the sole historical instance of the deposition of a high priest ) and banished to his home at Anathoth by Solomon , because he took part in the attempt to raise Adonijah to the throne .
The priesthood thus passed from the house of Ithamar ( 1 Sam .
Abiathar 's removal from the Priesthood fulfilled that other part of the curse on the House of Eli—that the Priesthood would pass out of the House of Eli .
In Georgian traditions , Abiathar and Sidonia were a legendary Jewish priest of Mtskheta and his daughter .
Abiathar is said to have been the first person Saint Nino converted to Christianity .
" Abiathar " ( pronounced " Abiathar " ( A·bi′a·thar ) in Modern Hebrew ) is sometimes used a male given name in contemporary Israel ( see Eviatar Banai , Eviatar Zerubavel , Eviatar Manor ) .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
In organic chemistry , an alkene , olefin , or olefine is an unsaturated chemical compound containing at least one carbon–carbon double bond .
The simplest acyclic alkenes , with only one double bond and no other functional groups , known as mono-enes , form a homologous series of hydrocarbons with the general formula n2n .
They have two hydrogen atoms less than the corresponding alkane ( with the same number of carbon atoms ) .
The simplest alkene is ethylene ( C2H4 ) , which has the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry ( IUPAC ) name "ethene " .
In the petrochemical industry alkenes are often called "olefins " .
For bridged alkenes , the Bredt 's rule states that a double bond cannot be placed at the bridgehead of a bridged ring system , unless the rings are large enough ( 8 or more atoms ) .
Aromatic compounds are often drawn as cyclic alkenes , but their structure and properties are different and they are not considered to be alkenes .
Like single covalent bonds , double bonds can be described in terms of overlapping atomic orbitals , except that , unlike a single bond ( which consists of a single sigma bond ) , a carbon–carbon double bond consists of one sigma bond and one pi bond .
This double bond is stronger than a single covalent bond ( 611 kJ/mol for C=C vs. 347 kJ/mol for C–C ) and also shorter with an average bond length of 1.33 Angstroms ( 133 pm ) .
Each carbon of the double bond uses its three " sp² " hybrid orbitals to form sigma bonds to three atoms .
The unhybridized "2p " atomic orbitals , which lie perpendicular to the plane created by the axes of the three " sp² " hybrid orbitals , combine to form the pi bond .
This bond lies outside the main C–C axis , with half of the bond on one side and half on the other .
Rotation about the carbon–carbon double bond is restricted because it involves breaking the pi bond , which requires a large amount of energy ( 264 kJ/mol in ethylene ) .
As a consequence , substituted alkenes may exist as one of two isomers , called " cis " or " trans " isomers .
More complex alkenes may be named using the E-Z notation , used to describe molecules having three or four different substituents ( side groups ) .
For example , of the isomers of butene , the two methyl groups of ( " Z")-but-2-ene (aka " cis"-2-butene ) face the same side of the double bond , and in ( " E")-but2-ene (aka " trans"-2-butene ) the methyl groups face the opposite side .
These two isomers of butene are slightly different in their chemical and physical properties .
It is certainly not impossible to twist a double bond .
In fact , a 90° twist requires an energy approximately equal to half the strength of a pi bond .
The misalignment of the p orbitals is less than expected because pyramidalization takes place ( See : pyramidal alkene ) .
" trans"-Cyclooctene is a stable strained alkene and the orbital misalignment is only 19° with a dihedral angle of 137° ( normal 120° ) and a degree of pyramidalization of 18° .
This explains the dipole moment of 0.8 D for this compound ( cis-isomer 0.4 D) where a value of zero is expected .
The " trans " isomer of cycloheptene is only stable at low temperatures .
As predicted by the VSEPR model of electron pair repulsion , the molecular geometry of alkenes includes bond angles about each carbon in a double bond of about 120° .
The angle may vary because of steric strain introduced by nonbonded interactions created by functional groups attached to the carbons of the double bond .
For example , the C-C-C bond angle in propylene is 123.9° .
The physical properties of alkenes are comparable with those of alkanes .
The main differences between the two are that the acidity levels of alkenes are much higher than the ones in alkanes .
The simplest alkenes , ethene , propene and butene are gases .
Linear alkenes of approximately five to sixteen carbons are liquids , and higher alkenes are waxy solids .
Alkenes are relatively stable compounds , but are more reactive than alkanes due to the presence of a carbon–carbon pi-bond .
It is also attributed to the presence of pi-electrons in the molecule .
The majority of the reactions of alkenes involve the rupture of this pi bond , forming new single bonds .
Alkenes serve as a feedstock for the petrochemical industry because they can participate in a wide variety of reactions .
Alkenes react in many addition reactions , which occur by opening up the double-bond .
Most addition reactions to alkenes follow the mechanism of electrophilic addition .
Examples of addition reactions are hydrohalogenation , halogenation , halohydrin formation , oxymercuration , hydroboration , dichlorocarbene addition , Simmons–Smith reaction , catalytic hydrogenation , epoxidation , radical polymerization and hydroxylation .
The reaction is carried out under pressure at a temperature of 200 °C in the presence of a metallic catalyst .
Common industrial catalysts are based on platinum , nickel or palladium .
For laboratory syntheses , Raney nickel ( an alloy of nickel and aluminium ) is often employed .
The simplest example of this reaction is the catalytic hydrogenation of ethylene to yield ethane :
The reaction is catalyzed by strong acids such as sulfuric acid .
This reaction is carried out on an industrial scale to make ethanol .
Alkenes can also be converted into alcohols via the oxymercuration–demercuration reaction or hydroboration–oxidation reaction .
In electrophilic halogenation the addition of elemental bromine or chlorine to alkenes yields vicinal dibromo- and dichloroalkanes ( 1,2-dihalides or ethylene dihalides ) , respectively .
The decoloration of a solution of bromine in water with dichloromethylene as catalyst is an analytical test for the presence of alkenes :
It is also used as a quantitative test of unsaturation , expressed as the bromine number of a single compound or mixture .
The reaction works because the high electron density at the double bond causes a temporary shift of electrons in the Br-Br bond causing a temporary induced dipole .
This makes the Br closest to the double bond slightly positive and therefore an electrophile .
Hydrohalogenation is the addition of hydrohalic acids such as HCl or HI to alkenes to yield the corresponding haloalkanes .
If the two carbon atoms at the double bond are linked to a different number of hydrogen atoms , the halogen is found preferentially at the carbon with fewer hydrogen substituents ( Markovnikov 's rule ) .
The use of radical initiators or other chemicals can lead to the opposite product result , but the reactive-intermediate structures and mechanisms are different .
Hydrobromic acid in particular is prone to forming radicals in the presence of various impurities or even atmospheric oxygen , leading to the reversal of the Markovnikov result :
Alkenes react with water and halogens to form halohydrins by an addition reaction .
Alkenes are oxidized with a large number of oxidizing agents .
In the presence of oxygen , alkenes burn with a bright flame to produce carbon dioxide and water .
Catalytic oxidation with oxygen or the reaction with percarboxylic acids yields epoxides .
Reaction with ozone in ozonolysis leads to the breaking of the double bond , yielding two aldehydes or ketones .
Reaction with concentrated , hot KMnO4 ( or other oxidizing salts ) in an acidic solution will yield ketones or carboxylic acids .
This reaction can be used to determine the position of a double bond in an unknown alkene .
The oxidation can be stopped at the vicinal diol rather than full cleavage of the alkene by using milder ( dilute ,lower temperature ) KMnO4 or with osmium tetroxide or other oxidants .
In the presence of an appropriate photosensitiser , such as methylene blue and light , alkenes can undergo reactions with reactive oxygen species generated by the photosensitiser , such as hydroxyl radicals , singlet oxygen or superoxide ion .
These reactive photochemical intermediates are generated in what are known as Type I , Type II , and Type III processes , respectively .
These various alternative processes and reactions can be controlled by choice of specific reaction conditions , leading to a wide range of different products .
A common example is the [ 4+2 ] cycloaddition of singlet oxygen with a diene such as cyclopentadiene to yield an endoperoxide :
Another example is the Schenck ene reaction , in which singlet oxygen reacts with an allylic structure to give a transposed allyl peroxide :
Polymerization of alkenes is a reaction that yields polymers of high industrial value at great economy , such as the plastics polyethylene and polypropylene .
Polymers from alkene monomers are referred to in a general way as "polyolefins " or in rare instances as "polyalkenes " .
A polymer from alpha-olefins is called a polyalphaolefin ( PAO ) .
Polymerization can proceed via either a free-radical or an ionic mechanism , converting the double to a single bond and forming single bonds to join the other monomers .
Polymerization of conjugated dienes such as buta-1,3-diene or isoprene (2-methylbuta-1,3-diene ) results in largely 1,4-addition with possibly some 1,2-addition of the diene monomer to a growing polymer chain .
The two carbon centres bond to the metal using the C-C pi- and pi* orbitals .
Mono - and diolefins are often used as ligands in stable complexes .
Cyclooctadiene and norbornadiene are popular chelating agents , and even ethylene itself is sometimes used as a ligand , for example , in Zeise 's salt .
In addition , metal–alkene complexes are intermediates in many metal-catalyzed reactions including hydrogenation , hydroformylation , and polymerization .
Raw materials are mostly natural gas condensate components ( principally ethane and propane ) in the US and Mideast and naphtha in Europe and Asia .
Alkanes are broken apart at high temperatures , often in the presence of a zeolite catalyst , to produce a mixture of primarily aliphatic alkenes and lower molecular weight alkanes .
The mixture is feedstock and temperature dependent , and separated by fractional distillation .
This is mainly used for the manufacture of small alkenes (up to six carbons ) .
Related to this is catalytic dehydrogenation , where an alkane loses hydrogen at high temperatures to produce a corresponding alkene .
This is the reverse of the catalytic hydrogenation of alkenes .
Both processes are endothermic and are driven towards the alkene at high temperatures by entropy .
Catalytic synthesis of higher α-alkenes ( of the type RCH=CH2 ) can also be achieved by a reaction of ethylene with the organometallic compound triethylaluminium in the presence of nickel , cobalt , or platinum .
One of the principal methods for alkene synthesis in the laboratory is the elimination of alkyl halides , alcohols , and similar compounds .
Most common is the β-elimination via the E2 or E1 mechanism , but α-eliminations are also known .
The E2 mechanism provides a more reliable β-elimination method than E1 for most alkene syntheses .
Most E2 eliminations start with an alkyl halide or alkyl sulfonate ester ( such as a tosylate or triflate ) .
When an alkyl halide is used , the reaction is called a dehydrohalogenation .
For unsymmetrical products , the more substituted alkenes ( those with fewer hydrogens attached to the C=C ) tend to predominate ( see Zaitsev 's rule ) .
Two common methods of elimination reactions are dehydrohalogenation of alkyl halides and dehydration of alcohols .
A typical example is shown below ; note that if possible , the H is "anti" to the leaving group , even though this leads to the less stable Z-isomer .
Alkenes can be synthesized from alcohols via dehydration , in which case water is lost via the E1 mechanism .
For example , the dehydration of ethanol produces ethene :
An alcohol may also be converted to a better leaving group ( e .g. , xanthate ) , so as to allow a milder " syn"-elimination such as the Chugaev elimination and the Grieco elimination .
Related reactions include eliminations by β-haloethers ( the Boord olefin synthesis ) and esters (ester pyrolysis ) .
Alkenes can be prepared indirectly from alkyl amines .
The amine or ammonia is not a suitable leaving group , so the amine is first either alkylated ( as in the Hofmann elimination ) or oxidized to an amine oxide ( the Cope reaction ) to render a smooth elimination possible .
The Cope reaction is a " syn"-elimination that occurs at or below 150 °C , for example :
The Hofmann elimination is unusual in that the "less " substituted ( non-Saytseff ) alkene is usually the major product .
Alkenes are generated from α-halo sulfones in the Ramberg-Bäcklund reaction , via a three-membered ring sulfone intermediate .
Another important method for alkene synthesis involves construction of a new carbon–carbon double bond by coupling of a carbonyl compound ( such as an aldehyde or ketone ) to a carbanion equivalent .
The most well-known of these methods is the Wittig reaction , but other related methods are known .
The Wittig reaction involves reaction of an aldehyde or ketone with a Wittig reagent ( or phosphorane ) of the type Ph3P=CHR to produce an alkene and Ph3P=O.
The Wittig reagent is itself prepared easily from triphenylphosphine and an alkyl halide .
The reaction is quite general and many functional groups are tolerated , even esters , as in this example :
Related to the Wittig reaction is the Peterson olefination .
This uses a less accessible silicon-based reagent in place of the phosphorane , but it allows for the selection of E or Z products .
If an E-product is desired , another alternative is the Julia olefination , which uses the carbanion generated from a phenyl sulfone .
The Takai olefination based on an organochromium intermediate also delivers E-products .
A titanium compound , Tebbe 's reagent , is useful for the synthesis of methylene compounds ; in this case , even esters and amides react .
A pair of carbonyl compounds can also be reductively coupled together ( with reduction ) to generate an alkene .
Symmetrical alkenes can be prepared from a single aldehyde or ketone coupling with itself , using Ti metal reduction ( the McMurry reaction ) .
If two different ketones are to be coupled , a more complex , indirect method such as the Barton–Kellogg reaction may be used .
A single ketone can also be converted to the corresponding alkene via its tosylhydrazone , using sodium methoxide ( the Bamford–Stevens reaction ) or an alkyllithium ( the Shapiro reaction ) .
Alkenes can be prepared by exchange with other alkenes , in a reaction known as olefin metathesis .
Frequently , loss of ethene gas is used to drive the reaction towards a desired product .
In many cases , a mixture of geometric isomers is obtained , but the reaction tolerates many functional groups .
The method is particularly effective for the preparation of cyclic alkenes , as in this synthesis of muscone :
Transition metal catalyzed hydrovinylation is another important alkene synthesis process starting from alkene itself .
In general , it involves the addition of a hydrogen and a vinyl group ( or an alkenyl group ) across a double bond .
The hydrovinylation reaction was first reported by Alderson , Jenner , and Lindsey by using rhodium and ruthenium salts , other metal catalysts commonly employed nowadays included iron , cobalt , nickel , and palladium .
The addition can be done highly regio- and stereo-selectively , the choices of metal centers , ligands , substrates and counterions often play very important role .
Recent studies showed that the use of N-heterocyclic carbene with Ni can be useful for the selective preparations of functionalized geminal olefins or 1,1-disubstituted alkenes .
Reduction of alkynes is a useful method for the stereoselective synthesis of disubstituted alkenes .
If the " cis"-alkene is desired , hydrogenation in the presence of Lindlar 's catalyst ( a heterogeneous catalyst that consists of palladium deposited on calcium carbonate and treated with various forms of lead ) is commonly used , though hydroboration followed by hydrolysis provides an alternative approach .
Reduction of the alkyne by sodium metal in liquid ammonia gives the " trans"-alkene .
For the preparation multisubstituted alkenes , carbometalation of alkynes can give rise to a large variety of alkene derivatives .
Alkenes can be synthesized from other alkenes via rearrangement reactions .
Besides olefin metathesis ( described above ) , a large number of pericyclic reactions can be used such as the ene reaction and the Cope rearrangement .
In the Diels-Alder reaction , a cyclohexene derivative is prepared from a diene and a reactive or electron-deficient alkene .
To form the root of the IUPAC names for alkenes , simply change the -an- infix of the parent to -en-.
In higher alkenes , where isomers exist that differ in location of the double bond , the following numbering system is used :
In the specific case of disubstituted alkenes where the two carbons have one substituent each , Cis-trans notation may be used .
If both substituents are on the same side of the bond , it is defined as ( cis-) .
If the substituents are on either side of the bond , it is defined as ( trans-) .
When an alkene has more than one substituent (especially necessary with 3 or 4 substituents ) , the double bond geometry is described using the labels " E" and " Z" .
These labels come from the German words "entgegen , " meaning "opposite , " and "zusammen , " meaning " together . "
Alkenes with the higher priority groups ( as determined by CIP rules ) on the same side of the double bond have these groups together and are designated " Z" .
Alkenes with the higher priority groups on opposite sides are designated " E" .
A mnemonic to remember this : Z notation has the higher priority groups on "ze zame zide . "
IUPAC recognizes two names for hydrocarbon groups containing carbon–carbon double bonds , the vinyl group and the allyl group . .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Andreas Schlüter ( 20 May 1664 – May 1714 ) was a German baroque sculptor and architect associated with the Petrine Baroque style of architecture and decoration .
Andreas Schlüter was born in Hamburg His early life is obscure as at least three different persons of that name are documented .
The records of St . Michaelis Church , Hamburg show that an Andreas Schlüter , son of sculptor Gerhart Schlüter , had been baptized there on 22 May 1664 .
Documents from Danzig ( Gdańsk ) reported that an Andreas Schlüter " (senior ) " had worked 1640-1652 in Danzig 's Jopengasse lane ( today 's ulica Piwna ) .
Possibly born in 1640 , an " Andres Schliter " is recorded as apprentice on 9 May 1656 by the mason 's guild .
Other sources state 1659 as year of birth .
He probably did spend several years abroad as Journeyman .
His first work , in 1675 , may have been epitaphs of the Dukes Sambor and Mestwin in the dome of Pelplin monastery .
Schlüter 's first known work was the decoration of the facade of the St . Johannis Chapel , or Danzig Royal Chapel , in 1681 .
He later created statues for King John III Sobieski 's Wilanów Palace in Warsaw and sepulchral sculptures in Żółkiew ( Zhovkva ) .
In 1689 , he moved to Warsaw and made the pediment reliefs and sculptural work of Krasiński Palace .
Schlüter was invited to Berlin in 1694 by Eberhard von Danckelmann to work as court sculptor at the armory ( " Zeughaus " ) for Elector Frederick III .
His sculpted decorations are a masterpiece of baroque expression and pathos .
While the more visible reliefs on the outside had to praise fighting , the statues of dying warriors in the interior denounced war and gave an indication of his pacifist religious beliefs ( he is said to have been a Mennonite ) .
Travelling through Italy in 1696 , he studied the work of masters like Michelangelo Buonarroti and Gian Lorenzo Bernini .
Schlüter also worked as an architect and built many state buildings in Berlin in his role as " Hofbaumeister " ( Court Architect ) , which he lost when one tower showed signs of a weak fundament .
He also served as director of the Akademie der Künste from 1702 to 1704 , after which he began concentrating on sculpting again , as " Hofbildhauer " ( Court Sculptor ) .
His most important equestrian sculpture is that of the " Great Elector" , Frederick William of Brandenburg , cast in 1708 and placed at " Lange Brücke " near the Berlin City Palace , now situated in the honor court before Charlottenburg Palace .
The Berlin City Palace , and many of his works , were partially destroyed by bombing in World War II and by the subsequent Communist regime .
A similar fate probably befell the Amber Room , made between 1701 and 1709 , Schlüter 's most famous work of architecture .
In 1713 Schlüter 's fame brought him to work for Tsar Peter the Great in Saint Petersburg , where he died of an illness after creating several designs .
Together with Johann Friedrich Braunstein , he designed the Grand Palace and Monplaisir Palace in Peterhof .
Also the city 's oldest building , Kikin 's Palace , and the reliefs at the Summer Palace are attributed to him .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Dutch hip hop or Nederhop is hip hop music created by musicians in the Netherlands and Flanders .
Between 1980-1985 a few Dutch Hip Hop records had already been released , but in 1986 Dutch rap duo MC Miker G & DJ Sven ( Lucien Witteveen and Sven van Veen ) had a major top 10 hit ( often # 1 ) across Europe with their " Holiday Rap" , which sampled Madonna 's " Holiday" .
That same year Dutch rapper Extince released his first record : Rap Around The Clock .
Another 1980s group was the Osdorp Posse , who first started to record tracks in Dutch .
But there is disagreement about who started rapping in Dutch between Blonnie B , Alex and the City Crew , Dynamic Rockers , Def Rhymes and Osdorp Posse .
Notable in the late 1980s were All Star Fresh of King Bee topping charts with : " Back by Dope Demand " in early 1990 and Rudeboy of Urban Dance Squad who , at the time , were arguably more widely known in New York City than the Netherlands .
DJ and Producer All Star Fresh Started as a Pro in 1979 made .
After winning the Dutch Mixing Championships ( DMC) in 1988 , he was invited for The World Mix Championships in the London Royal Hall and won third place in a fierce competition .
He was invited by Dave Funkenklein to enter the lions hole in New York .
He made history in the Big Apple of Hiphop by being the first non -American to fly into the finals of The World Supremacy Battle of DJs .
He gained the highly respected second place of this prestigious DJ contest ) .
The impression that he made that year , resulted in many invitations to perform with world known artists like Public Enemy , Stetsasonic , Ice T and Ultra Magnetic MCs .
As performer and producer he is very well known as KING BEE.
With his second floor filler Back By Dope Demand he scored one of the biggest hiphop hits .
In the Netherlands it resulted in a Top 3 position .
Best Dance Product by The Edison Awards in the Netherlands .
( The Edison Awards is an award by the Dutch Music Industry . )
This also meant that with this title , he was the first black artist to win this highest to win award in the Netherlands .
After that he appeared as supporting act for Madonnas show in the Netherlands .
All Star Fresh kept entering the dance floors .
The last titles mentioned were also world wide hits , selling over 2.4 million copies .
He did n't only work within projects like King Bee or Capella , but also was featuring famous production teams like Snap ( I Got the Power ) .
This teamwork resulted in the single Lets Get Busy ( Clubland Quarts feat Snap introductin King Bee ) .
This record ended up No 01 in the Billboard Dance Charts ( United States ) .
Other productions were Deepzone " It 's Gonna Be All right " , a straight up club anthem even until today .
Kellee - my love , Ty Holden- you 're my Inspiration and His Royal Freshness - They do n't understand are a couple of other productions in this line .
Urban Dance Squad was a Dutch rap rock band formed after what was originally intended as a one-time jam-session at a festival in Utrecht on December 20 , 1986 .
Band members were rapper Rudeboy Remmington ( Patrick Tilon ) , guitarist Tres Manos ( René van Barneveld ) , bassist Sil ( Silvano Matadin ) , drummer Magic Stick ( Michel Schoots ) and DJ DNA ( DoNotAsk ) ( Arjen de Vreede ) .
The band 's music is described as a blend of genres , including hard rock , funk , soul , hip hop , reggae , jazz and ska and is often compared to that of Rage Against the Machine , the Red Hot Chili Peppers and Fishbone .
They are widely known for their hit single " Deeper Shade Of Soul" , which charted at number 21 in the United States on Billboard Hot 100 .
It is a well known fact that Rage Against the Machine was inspired by the Urban Dance Squad .
In 1992 , Osdorp Posse released their debut album " Osdorp Stijl" , which was the first-ever Dutch hip hop .
They started out translating N.W.A songs to Dutch , though later wrote their own rhymes in Dutch .
Their beats , created by producer Seda on Amiga 500 with Protracker , have a familiar heavy sound and are similar to U.S. old-school hip hop .
In the 17 years of de Osdorp Posse 's existence , the crew has n't changed their style and are still making hardcore hip hop .
After the first Osdorp Posse demo cassette they toured around the Netherlands .
In Deventer they found the first followers and the first Dutch language hip hop scene .
The first hip hop groups after Osdorp Posse were Zuid-Oost Posse and Maasstraat Mannen .
These groups did concerts all over the Netherlands .
Maasstraat became famous as the first group combining reggae with Dutch lyrics , inspiring acts like Postmen , for example .
Another Dutch-language rapper is Extince , who in 1995 took Nederhop to a new commercial level .
With two of his singles " Spraakwater " and " Kaal of Kammen " being major hits in the mid-1990s , Extince was the first Dutch rapper making the MegaCharts .
Other notable acts include Ali B ( who has been featured on other artists ' tracks , most significantly with Marco Borsato on the song " Wat zou je doen ? " for the charity War Child who achieved solo success with " Leipe mocro flavour" .
Together with his cousin Yes-R he made an international remix of " Ghetto " together with Akon . ; the duo Lange Frans & Baas B with their patriotic but introspective " Het Land Van " ; and Yes-R.
Other notable groups are " Opgezwolle " ( consisting of rapper Sticky Steez , rapper Phreaco Rico and DJ Delic ) and Brainpower .
There were two styles dominating the Dutch hip hop landscape : Extince , known for his easy flows , catchy songs and funky tunes , while hardcore performers like Westklan and Osdorp Posse found their own niche group of fans .
In the mid-1990s The Postmen were topping the charts with their rap/reggae mix .
In the early 2000s the MC fronted band Relax got much airplay , as did de Spookrijders .
A combination of these two styles gave birth to de Spookrijders , a three-man hip-hop group founded in 1996 .
With MCs Stefan and Clyde rapping about their personal lives and life in Amsterdam as a black man , de Spookrijders even gained respect from non-hip-hop musicians and fans .
Most people admired the work of producer/DJ Cliff 'the Jazz ' Nille after releasing Spookrijders debut album " De Echte Shit " .
In 1999 de Spookrijders hit the charts twice with the hits " Klokkenluiders " and "Ik ben de man . "
Both these songs appeared on the second album , " Klokkenluiders van Amsterdam " .
After some personal arguments among the three crewmembers , de Spookrijders split up in 2003 , after releasing their and final third album " Hee ... Spookies ! ! "
Opgezwolle , a group from Zwolle 's latest album , " Eigen Wereld " ( Own World ) appeared in the ' Album Top 100' at number 4 ; the highest notation of a Dutch rap album ever .
Members Rico & Sticks formed a new group , Fakkelbrigade with MC Typhoon , Mick 2dope Murray , MC James and beatmaker A.R.T..
In 2009 , they released the album " Colucci Era" .
In the mid-2000s Cilvaringz , Ali B and Raymzter have commercially been successful and Lange Frans & Baas B have had multiple # 1 hits .
In 2005 , De Jeugd van Tegenwoordig ( " The youth of today " ) were successful with " Watskeburt ? ! " ( " Wuzhappenin ? ! " ) .
Rapper Jawat won the " Grote prijs van Nederland " 2006 .
Another Dutch hip-hop duo are Pete Philly and Perquisite who are already well known in the Netherlands , Germany , and even in Japan .
A famous Dutch rapper outside the Netherlands is Salah Edin .
His album Nederlands Grootste Nachtmerrie ( Biggest Nightmare of the Netherlands ) won Best Album Award in 2007 and was fully produced by Dr. Dre 's right hand man Focus .
He also shot three of the most expensive music videos ever in the history of Dutch Hip Hop and through a management deal with Cilvaringz , performed in 34 countries worldwide .
The year 2010 is considered an important year for Dutch hip-hop , with many albums and mixtapes released from the biggest Dutch rappers .
Also Mc Battles are having a large amount of popularity .
So are the recently Nederhop blogs as Nederhopofficial .nl
( Owner Dennis Strooband ) and Puna .nl ( Owner Thomas Abera ) growing fastly .
The Dutch hip-hop scene also saw many conflicts between rappers , followed by diss tracks .
The following were the biggest Dutch feuds ever in hip-hop :
Vs Negativ , Kempi Vs Nino , Brainpower Vs Extince , Yukkie B Vs Negativ , T.H.C. Vs Lexxxus , Baas B Vs Kimo , Kempi Vs Mini , Kempi Vs Bloedserieus , Heist Rockah Vs Negativ , and Regga Vs Lexxxus .
The feud between T.H.C. and Lexxxus resulted in a fistfight on a hip-hop event , when T.H.C. frontman rocks got into an argument with Lexxxus and then started the fistfight .
Also many Dutch rappers got shot/stabbed , wounding or killing them .
Bloedserieus rapper Sane got in a fight over drugs and was fatally stabbed at Eindhoven Central Station .
Kane ( another rapper of Bloedserieus and the twinbrother of Sane ) made a song about this called " Jonko voor Sane " ( Joint for Sane ) .
Amsterdam rappers Lexxxus , Flex of T.H.C. and Mr. Probz got shot .
Dutch gangsta hip hop is currently a large scene together with underground hip-hop .
Among the most notable groups are THC , Heinek 'n , Keizer , Kempi , Steen , Hef , Crooks , Adonis and Negativ.
The rhythms are influenced by the American rap scene , and the lyrics are often about crime , drugs ,money ,women and many criminal things .
All coming from Dutch Ghettos ,they say what they see in their area .
Dutch gangsta hip hop mostly comes from Amsterdam , Den Haag , Rotterdam , Utrecht and Eindhoven .
The commercial success of Dutch hip hop is largely made by Brainpower , Yes-R , Ali B , Lange Frans & Baas B and Extince .
For a large part of the Dutch hip hop community Yes-R , Ali B and Lange Frans & Baas B are sometimes considered fake because they do a lot of work for children TV stations .
Brainpower and Extince however both enjoy a great respect for bringing up hip hop in their native Dutch .
Other commercial rappers are De Jeugd van Tegenwoordig , and one of the more popular artists in the Netherlands , Partysquad or The Partysquad .
They are a 2-man group , having had success with hits such as " Stuk " ( Broken ) , and " Dat is Die Shit " ( That 's the shit ) , with other popular songs in the background such as " Non Stop " ft .
Brainpower , " We Gaan Los " ( we 're going crazy {because of highness or drunkenness} ) with Kempi , and " Wat Wil Je Doen " ( Whut u gonna do ? ) .
The Dutch oldskool exists out of three primary artists , LTH , Osdorp Posse , Extince , Sugacane and Duvelduvel .
Osdorp Posse make to what they themselves call hardcore rap and use beats that have much in common with N.W.A. . Their lyrics are about racism , prostitution ( not always negatively ) , police and other social subjects .
Extince uses very different , more funky kind of beats than Osdorp Posse and uses a completely different rapstyle .
The Dutch hip hop scene is roughly divided by 17 of the Netherlands ' larger cities .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum is a musical with music and lyrics by Stephen Sondheim and book by Burt Shevelove and Larry Gelbart .
Inspired by the farces of the ancient Roman playwright Plautus ( 251–183 BC ) , specifically " Pseudolus" , " Miles Gloriosus " and " Mostellaria" , the musical tells the bawdy story of a slave named Pseudolus and his attempts to win his freedom by helping his young master woo the girl next door .
The plot displays many classic elements of farce , including puns , the slamming of doors , cases of mistaken identity ( frequently involving characters disguising themselves as one another ) , and satirical comments on social class .
The title derives from the line that vaudeville comedians often used to begin a story : " A funny thing happened on the way to the theater " .
The musical 's original 1962 Broadway run won several Tony Awards , including Best Musical and Best Book .
" A Funny Thing " has enjoyed several Broadway and West End revivals and was made into a successful film starring the original lead of the musical , Zero Mostel .
" A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum " opened on Broadway on May 8 , 1962 at the Alvin Theatre , and then transferred to the Mark Hellinger Theatre and the Majestic Theatre , where the show closed on August 29 , 1964 , after 964 performances and 8 previews .
The show 's creators originally wanted Phil Silvers in the lead role of Pseudolus , but he turned them down , allegedly because he would have to perform onstage without his glasses , and his vision was so poor that he feared tripping into the orchestra pit .
He is also quoted as turning down the role for being "Sgt .
( Silvers went on to play the role—wearing his glasses—in a 1972 revival . )
During the out of town pre-Broadway tryouts the show was attracting little business and not playing well .
Jerome Robbins was called in by director George Abbott and producer Hal Prince to give advice and make changes .
The biggest change Robbins made was a new opening number to replace " Love Is in the Air " and introduce the show as a bawdy , wild comedy .
Stephen Sondheim wrote the song " Comedy Tonight " for this new opening .
From that point on , the show was a success .
It was directed by George Abbott and produced by Hal Prince , with choreography by Jack Cole and uncredited staging and choreography by Jerome Robbins .
The scenic and costume design was by Tony Walton .
This wardrobe is on display at the Costume World Broadway Collection in Pompano Beach , Florida .
Along with Mostel , the musical featured a cast of seasoned performers , including Jack Gilford ( Mostel 's friend and fellow blacklist member ) , David Burns , John Carradine , Ruth Kobart and Raymond Walburn .
The young lovers were played by Brian Davies and Preshy Marker .
Karen Black , originally cast as the ingenue , was replaced out of town .
The show won several Tony Awards : best musical , best actor , best supporting actor ( Burns ) , best book , and best director .
The score , Sondheim 's first time on Broadway writing both words and music , was coolly received , however , not even garnering a nomination .
The show was presented two times in London 's West End .
The 1963 production and its 1986 revival were staged at the Strand Theatre and the Piccadilly Theatre respectively , and featured Frankie Howerd starring as Pseudolus , Kenneth Connor as Hysterium , ' Monsewer ' Eddie Gray as Senex , Jon Pertwee as Marcus Lycus and Leon Greene as Miles Gloriosus .
In 2004 there was a limited-run revival at the Royal National Theatre starring Desmond Barrit as Pseudolus , Philip Quast as Miles Gloriosus , Hamish McColl as Hysterium and Isla Blair as Domina ( who had previously played Philia in the 1963 production ) .
" A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum " was made into a musical film in 1966 , directed by Richard Lester , with Zero Mostel and Jack Gilford re-creating their Broadway stage roles , Leon Greene reprising his West End stage role and Phil Silvers starred in an expanded role as " Marcus Lycus" .
David Burns did not return for the film role of Senex , which was played in the film by Michael Hordern .
Buster Keaton made his final film appearance in the role of Erronius .
In 1972 there was a critically well-received Broadway revival , directed by co-author Burt Shevelove and starring Phil Silvers as Pseudolus ( followed later by Tom Poston in the role ) , Lew Parker as Senex and Reginald Owen as Erronius .
Larry Blyden , who played Hysterium , the role created by Jack Gilford , also co-produced .
Two songs were dropped from the show , and two new Sondheim songs were added .
The new songs included in this production had been added during a 1971 Los Angeles production : "Echo Song " ( sung by Hero and Philia ) , and " Farewell " (added for Nancy Walker playing the role of Domina as she and Senex depart for the country ) .
The production ran 156 performances , but had to close soon after Phil Silvers suffered a stroke .
The show won Tonys for Silvers and Blyden .
The musical was also revived with great success in 1996 , starring Nathan Lane as Pseudolus ( replaced later in the run by Whoopi Goldberg and also by David Alan Grier ) , Mark Linn-Baker as Hysterium , Ernie Sabella as Lycus , Jim Stanek as Hero , Lewis J. Stadlen as Senex , and Cris Groenendaal as Miles Gloriosus .
The production , directed by Jerry Zaks , ran for 715 performances .
Every actor who has opened in the role of Pseudolus on Broadway ( Zero Mostel , Phil Silvers and Nathan Lane ) won a Best Actor Tony Award for their performance .
In addition , Jason Alexander , who performed as Pseudolus in one scene in Jerome Robbins ' Broadway , also won a Tony for Best Actor in a Musical .
The Stephen Sondheim Center for the Performing Arts produced a limited-run revival of the musical from January 11 to 27 , 2008 .
The production was directed by Randal K. West , with Justin Hill as musical director and Adam Cates as choreographer .
The cast featured Richard Kind as Pseudolus , Joel Blum as Senex , Stephen DeRosa as Marcus Lycus , Sean McCall as Hysterium , and Steve Wilson as Miles Gloriosus .
It also featured Diana Upton-Hill , Ryan Gaffney , Stephen Mark Crisp , Jack Kloppenborg and Margret Clair .
The Chung Ying Theatre Company in Hong Kong staged a Cantonese version of the musical at Kwai Tsing Theatre , to celebrate the company 's 30th anniversary .
It was directed by Chung King Fai and Ko Tin Lung and ran from 14 to 21 March 2009 .
The Stratford Shakespeare Festival in Stratford , Ontario , Canada production ran from June 11 to November 7 , 2009 , with Des McAnuff directing and Wayne Cilento as choreographer .
Bruce Dow originally performed the role of Pseudolus , but was forced to withdraw from the entire 2009 season due to an injury , and the role was then performed by Seán Cullen as of September 5 , 2009 .
Mirvish Productions presented the earlier Stratford production at the Canon Theatre , Toronto , in December 2010 through January 2011 .
Bruce Dow and Sean Cullen were alternates in the lead role .
In October 2012 the play opened at Her Majesty 's Theatre , Melbourne , Australia , with Geoffrey Rush as Pseudolus , Magda Szubanski as Domina and Shane Bourne as Senex .
Stephen Sondheim came to Melbourne specifically to watch the show .
In ancient Rome , some neighbors live in three adjacent houses .
In the center is the house of Senex , who lives there with wife Domina , son Hero , and several slaves , including head slave Hysterium and the musical 's main character Pseudolus .
A slave belonging to Hero , Pseudolus wishes to buy , win , or steal his freedom .
One of the neighboring houses is owned by Marcus Lycus , who is a buyer and seller of beautiful women ; the other belongs to the ancient Erronius , who is abroad searching for his long-lost children ( stolen in infancy by pirates ) .
One day , Senex and Domina go on a trip and leave Pseudolus in charge of Hero .
Hero confides in Pseudolus that he is in love with the lovely Philia , one of the courtesans in the House of Lycus ( albeit still a virgin ) .
Pseudolus promises to help him win Philia 's love in exchange for his own freedom .
Unfortunately ( as the two find out when they pay a visit on Lycus ) , Philia has been sold to the renowned warrior Miles Gloriosus , who is expected to claim her very soon .
Pseudolus , an excellent liar , uses Philia 's cheery disposition to convince Lycus that she has picked up a plague from Crete , which causes its victims to smile endlessly in its terminal stages .
By offering to isolate her in Senex 's house , he is able to give Philia and Hero some time alone together , and the two fall in love .
But Philia insists that , even though she is in love with Hero , she must honor her contract with the Captain , for " that is the way of a courtesan . "
To appease her , he tells her to wait ( "that 's what virgins do best , is n't it ? " )
inside , and that he will have the captain knock three times when he arrives .
Pseudolus comes up with a plan to slip Philia a sleeping potion that will render her unconscious .
He will then tell Lycus that she has died of the Cretan plague , and will offer to remove the body .
Hero will come along , and they will stow away on a ship headed for Greece .
Satisfied with his plan , Pseudolus steals Hysterium 's book of potions and has Hero read him the recipe for the sleeping potion ; the only ingredient he lacks is "mare 's sweat , " and Pseudolus goes off in search of some .
Unexpectedly , Senex returns home early from his trip , and knocks three times on his own door .
Philia comes out of the house , and , thinking that Senex is the Captain , offers herself up to him .
Surprised but game , Senex instructs Philia to wait in the house for him , and she does .
Hysterium arrives to this confusion , and tells Senex that Philia is the new maid that he has hired .
Pseudolus returns , having procured the necessary mare 's sweat ; seeing that Senex has returned unexpectedly and grasping the need to keep him out of the way , Pseudolus discreetly sprinkles some of the horse-sweat onto him , then suggests that the road trip has left Senex in dire need of a bath .
Taking the bait , Senex instructs Hysterium to draw him a bath in the long-abandoned house of Erronius .
But while this is happening , Erronius returns home , finally having given up the search for his long-lost children .
Hysterium , desperate to keep him out of the house where his master is bathing , tells the old man that his house has become haunted – a story seemingly confirmed by the sound of Senex singing in his bath .
Erronius immediately determines to have a soothsayer come and banish the spirit from his house , and Pseudolus obligingly poses as one , telling Erronius that , in order to banish the spirit , he must travel seven times around the seven hills of Rome ( thus keeping the old man occupied and out of the way for quite a while ) .
When Miles Gloriosus arrives to claim his courtesan-bride , Pseudolus hides Philia on the roof of Senex 's house ; told that she has "escaped , " Lycus is terrified to face the Captain 's wrath .
Pseudolus offers to impersonate Lycus and talk his way out of the mess but , his ingenuity flagging , he ends up merely telling the Captain that Philia has disappeared , and that he , " Lycus , " will set out in search of her .
Displeased and suspicious , Miles insists that his soldiers accompany Pseudolus , but the wily slave is able to lose them in Rome 's winding streets .
Complicating matters further , Domina returns from her trip early , suspicious that her husband Senex is "up to something low . "
She disguises herself in virginal white robes and a veil ( much like Philia 's ) to try to catch Senex being unfaithful .
Pseudolus convinces Hysterium to help him by dressing in drag and pretending to be Philia , "dead " from the plague .
Unfortunately , it turns out that Miles Gloriosus has just returned from Crete , where there is of course no actual plague .
With the ruse thus revealed , the main characters run for their lives , resulting in a madcap chase across the stage with both Miles and Senex pursuing all three " Philia" s ( Domina , Hysterium , and the actual Philia – all wearing identical white robes and veils ) .
Meanwhile , the courtesans from the house of Marcus Lycus – who had been recruited as mourners at " Philia " 's ersatz funeral – have escaped , and Lycus sends his eunuchs out to bring them all back , adding to the general pandemonium .
Finally , the Captain 's troops are able to round everyone up .
His plot thoroughly unraveled , Pseudolus appears to be in deep trouble – but Erronius , completing his third circuit of the Roman hills , shows up fortuitously to discover that Miles Gloriosus and Philia are wearing matching rings which mark them as his long-lost children .
Philia 's betrothal to the Captain is obviously nullified by the unexpected revelation that he 's her brother .
Philia weds Hero ; Pseudolus gets his freedom and the lovely slave girl Gymnasia ; Gloriosus receives twin courtesans to replace Philia ; Erronius gets his children , and a happy ending prevails for all – except for poor Senex , stuck with his shrewish wife Domina .
Notes : The song " Love Is in the Air " was originally intended as the opening number .
The song was cut from the show and replaced with " Comedy Tonight " .
The song was later featured in the film " The Birdcage " ( 1996 ) and performed by Robin Williams and Christine Baranski .
Another draft of the opening number , " Invocation and Instructions to the Audience , " has been used in subsequent revues of Sondheim songs and was sung by Nathan Lane in the musical " The Frogs " .
" Pretty Little Picture " is frequently dropped from productions of the show , and one verse of " I 'm Calm " is also frequently trimmed .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Aleut people ( ) ( ) are the indigenous people of the Aleutian Islands of Alaska , United States and Kamchatka Krai , Russia .
А . Меновщиков ) , the name Aleut comes from the Aleut word "allíthuh" , meaning " community . "
According to American historian and ethnologist Hubert Howe Bancroft and later Edward J. Vajda , the term " Aleut " ( Rus .
алеут ) was brought by the Russians , probably by extending the Kamchatka village name of " Alyut " eastward ( the Koryaks who lived there , called Alyutor ( own name "alutal 'u" , Rus .
A regional self-denomination is , Unangan or Unanga , meaning "original people . "
Russian fur traders gave the name Aleut to the Unangan in the mid-18th century .
This term was adopted by other Europeans who learned from the Russians .
The Unangan Aleuts are not to be confused with the Alutiiq , a nearby Southern Yupik group , who were also referred to as " Aleuts " by the Russians , and are still often called thus today .
Ivan Veniaminov lived amongst the indigenous people of the Fox Islands in Alaska from 1824 to 1834 , extensively studying the language and the people .
He learned they called themselves Unangan , writing in his journal , " The inhabitants of these islands , called ' Aleuts ' by the Russians and by all the Europeans , called themselves ' Unangan '" ( p .
In addition to the " ...general appellation , Unangan..." , Veniaminof documented local names for people of various island groups to the east and west .
The word " Unangan " ( plural Unanga-x ) evidently translates to " Seasider . "
While English and Russian are the dominant languages used by Aleuts living in the United States and Russia respectively , the Aleut language is still spoken by an estimated 150 people in the United States and 500 people in Russia .
The language belongs to the Eskimo-Aleut language family and includes three dialect groupings : Eastern Aleut , spoken on the Eastern Aleutian , Shumagin , Fox and Pribilof Islands ; Atkan , spoken on Atka and Bering islands ; and the now extinct Attuan dialect .
The Pribilof Islands boast the highest number of active speakers of Aleutian .
Most of the Native elders speak Aleut , but it is very rare for an everyday person to speak the language fluently .
Aleut was written in the Cyrillic script beginning in 1829 .
In the 1870 , the language was written in the Latin script .
An Aleut dictionary and grammar have been published , and portions of the Bible were translated into Aleut .
Тhe Aleut people were distributed throughout the Aleutian Islands , the Shumagin Islands , and the far western part of the Alaska Peninsula , with an estimated population of around 25,000 before contact with Europeans .
In the 1820s , the Russian-American Company administered a large portion of the North Pacific during a Russian-led expansion of the fur trade .
They resettled many Aleut families to the Commander Islands ( within the Aleutsky District of the Kamchatka Krai in Russia ) and to the Pribilof Islands ( in Alaska ) .
The number of Aleut has dwindled to about 2,000 , as they suffered high fatalities in the 19th and early 20th centuries from Eurasian infectious diseases to which they had no immunity .
In addition , the population suffered as traditional lifestyles were disrupted .
People of partial Aleut descent , many of whom identify as Aleut and continue the culture , may number around 15,000 .
Russian traders and later Europeans married Aleut women and had families with them .
After the arrival of Russian Orthodox missionaries in the late 18th century , many Aleuts became Christian .
Of the numerous Russian Orthodox congregations in Alaska , most are majority Alaska Native in ethnicity .
One of the earliest Christian martyrs in North America was Saint Peter the Aleut .
In the 18th century , Russia traders "promyshlenniki " established settlements on the islands and exploited the people .
There was a recorded revolt against Russian workers in Amchitka in 1784 .
It started when supplies ran out which the Russians had provided to local people in trade for their furs .
There was high demand for the furs that the Aleut provided from hunting .
In 1811 , in order to obtain more of the commercially valuable otter pelts , a party of Aleut hunters traveled to the coastal island of San Nicolas , near the Alta California-Baja California border .
The locally resident Nicoleño nation sought a payment from the Aleut hunters for the large number of otters being killed in the area .
Disagreement arose , turning violent ; in the ensuing battle , the Aleut killed nearly all the Nicoleño men .
Together with high fatalities from European diseases , the Nicoleños suffered so much from the loss of their men that by 1853 , only one living Nicoleña person remained .
( See Juana Maria , " The Lone Woman of San Nicolas" , also known as Karana )
Prior to major influence from outside , there were approximately 25,000 Aleuts on the archipelago .
Foreign diseases , harsh treatment and disruption of traditional society soon reduced the population to less than one-tenth this number .
In the 2000 Census , 11,941 people identified as being Aleut ; nearly 17,000 said Aleuts were among their ancestors .
Alaskans generally recognize that the Russian occupation , while the colonists were limited in number , resulted in few full-blooded Aleuts today .
When Alaska Natives enrolled in their regional corporations under the terms of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act of 1971 ( ANCSA ) , the Aleut Corporation attracted only about 2,000 enrollees who could prove a blood quantum of 1/4 or more Alaska Native ( including Aleut ) .
In 1942 , during World War II , Japanese forces occupied Attu and Kiska Islands in the western Aleutians .
They later transported captive Attu Islanders to Hokkaidō , where they were held as prisoners of war .
The United States government evacuated hundreds more Aleuts from the western chain and the Pribilofs during WWII , placing them in internment camps in southeast Alaska , where many died .
The Aleut Restitution Act of 1988 was an attempt by Congress to compensate the survivors .
The World War II campaign by the United States to retake Attu and Kiska was a significant component of the operations in the Pacific theater .
In May 1784 , local Aleut revolted on Amchitka against the Russian traders .
The Russians had a small trading post there .
According to what Aleut people said , in an account recorded by Japanese castaways and published in 2004 , otters were decreasing year by year .
Their share in the return for the furs they made also were decreasing , as Russian ships stopped coming to the island .
The Japanese learned that the Aleut felt the situation was at crisis .
The leading Aleuts negotiated with the Russians , saying they had failed to deliver enough supplies in return for furs .
Nezimov , leader of the Russians ordered two of his men , Stephano ( ステッパノ ) and Kazhimov ( カジモフ ) to kill his mistress Oniishin ( オニイシン ) , who was the Aleut chief 's daughter , because he doubted that Oniishin had tried to dissuade her father and other leaders from pushing for more goods .
That evening , hundreds of Aleut men gathered on a mountain and marched to the Russians ' houses .
When five Russians opened fire , the Aleuts ran away .
The next day the Aleut returned , but escaped again when the Russians started firing .
While the men attempted another attack the next day , they yelled and moved more quickly towards the house .
As Russians opened fire , they started to run away again .
After they ran , Russians noticed that all the men had left the village .
The Russians took around 40 women and children hostage , forcing the Aleut to surrender .
After they had been killed , the Aleut began to move from Amchitka to neighboring islands .
Nevizimov , leader of the Russian group , was jailed after the whole incident was reported to Russian officials .(According
to , written by Katsuragawa Hoshū after interviewing Daikokuya Kōdayū . )
According to Lillie McGarvey , a 20th-century Aleut leader , "barabaras " keep "occupants dry from the frequent rains , warm at all times , and snugly sheltered from the high winds common to the area" .
Aleuts traditionally built houses by digging an oblong square pit in the ground , usually 50 feet by 20 feet or smaller .
The pit was then covered by a roof framed with driftwood , thatched with grass , then covered with earth for insulation .
Inside benches were place along the sides , with a hearth in the middle .
The bedrooms were at the back of the lodge , opposite the entrance .
They fished for salmon , crabs , shellfish , and cod , as well as harvesting sea mammals such as seal , walrus and whales .
The fish and sea animals were processed in a variety of ways : dried , smoked or roasted .
Caribou , musk oxen , deer , moose , whale and other types of game were eaten roasted or preserved for later use .
They were also processed as "alutiqqutigaq" , a mixture of berries , fat and fish .
The boiled skin and blubber of a whale was a delicacy , as was walrus .
Today many Aleut continue to eat their traditional foods , but also buy the processed foods from " Outside" , which are very expensive in Alaska .
Traditional arts of the Aleut include weapon-making , building of "baidarkas " ( special hunting boats ) , weaving , figurines , clothing , carving , and mask making .
Men as well as women often carved ivory and wood .
19th-century craftsmen were famed for their ornate wooden hunting hats , which feature elaborate and colorful designs and may be trimmed with sea lion whiskers , feathers , and ivory .
Andrew Gronholdt of the Shumagin Islands has played a vital role in reviving the ancient art of building the " chaguda-x" or traditional bentwood hats .
Aleut women sewed finely stitched waterproof parkas from seal gut , and wove fine baskets from dune wildrye grass or " Elymus mollis " .
Some women continue to make baskets in this way .
Aleut arts are practiced and taught throughout the state of Alaska .
As many Aleut have moved out of the islands to other parts of the state , they have taken with them the knowledge of their arts .
They have also adopted new materials and methods for their art .
The Aleut carved work , distinct in each region , has attracted traders for centuries , including early Europeans and other Alaska Natives .
Historically carving was a male art and leadership attribute ; in today’s world it is an art of both sexes .
Most commonly the carvings of ivory and wood originated as part of making hunting weapons .
Other carvings depicted the animals of their world , which were so important : such as seals and whales .
The Aleut also carve walrus ivory for other uses , such as jewelry and sewing needles .
Jewelry is made with designs specific to the region of each people .
Each clan would have a specific style to signify their origin .
Jewelry ornaments were made for piercing lips ( labrum ) , nose , and ears , as well as for necklaces .
Each woman had her own sewing needles , which she made , and that often had detailed end of animal heads .
Aleut basketry is some of the finest in the world .
The main method of basketry was false embroidery ( overlay ) .
Strands of grasses or reeds were overlaid upon the basic weaving surface , to obtain a plastic effect .
Early Aleut women created baskets and woven mats of exceptional technical quality , using only their thumbnail , grown long and then sharpened , as a tool .
Today , Aleut weavers continue to produce woven grass pieces of a remarkable cloth-like texture , works of modern art with roots in ancient tradition .
Birch bark , puffin feathers , and baleen are also commonly used by the Aleut in basketry .
The Aleut term for grass basket is "qiigam aygaaxsii" .
One Aleut leader recognized by the State of Alaska for her work in teaching and reviving Aleut basketry was Anfesia Shapsnikoff .
Her life and accomplishments are portrayed in the book " Moments Rightly Placed "( 1998 ) .
Masks were created to portray figures of their myths and oral history .
The Atka people believed that another people lived in their land before them .
They portrayed such ancients in their masks , which show anthropomorphic creatures named in their language .
Knut Bergsland says their word means “like those found in caves . ”
Masks were generally carved from wood and were decorated with paints made from berries or other natural products .
Feathers were inserted into holes carved out for extra decoration .
These masks were used in ceremonies ranging from dances to praises , each with its own meaning and purpose .
The tattoos and piercings of the Aleut people demonstrated accomplishments as well as their religious views .
They believed their body art would please the spirits of the animals and make any evil go away .
The body orifices were believed to be pathways for the entry of evil entities .
By piercing their orifices : the nose , the mouth , and ears , they would stop evil entities , "khoughkh" , from entering their bodies ( Osborn , 52 ) .
Body art also enhanced their beauty , social status , and spiritual authority .
Before the 19th century , piercings and tattoos were very common among the Aleut people , especially among women .
Piercings , such as the nose pin , were common among both men and women and were usually performed a few days after birth .
The ornament was made of various materials , a piece of bark or bone , or an eagle’s feather shaft .
From time to time , adult women decorated the nose pins by hanging pieces of amber and coral from strings on it ; the semi-precious objects dangled down to their chins .
The Aleuts pierced holes around the rim of their ears with dentalium shells ( tooth shells or tusk shells ) , bone , feathers , dried bird wings or skulls and/or amber .
Materials associated with birds were important , as birds were considered to defend animals in the spirit world .
A male would wear sea lion whiskers in his ears as a trophy of his expertise as a hunter .
Worn for decorative reasons , and sometimes to signify social standing , reputation , and the age of the wearer , Aleuts would pierce their lower lips with walrus ivory and wear beads or bones .
The individual with the most piercings held the highest respect .
Tattooing for women began when they reached physical maturity , or menstruation , at about age 20 .
Men traditionally received their first tattoo after killing their first animal , another rite of passage .
For example , the daughter of a rich , famous ancestor or father would work hard at her tattoos to show the accomplishments of that ancestor or father .
They would sew , or prick , different designs on the chin , the side of the face , or under the nose .
The Russians arrived in the Aleutian Islands in 1786 and were active there , with small trading settlements and religious missions , through the mid-19th century .
They often enslaved the natives , forcing them to work for them .
Their influence disrupted Aleut life , and many of the traditional customs disappeared .
The Aleut people developed in one of the harshest climates in the world , and learned to create and protect warmth .
Both men and women wore parkas that extended below the knees .
The women wore the skin of seal or sea-otter , and the men wore bird skin parkas , the feathers turned in or out depending on the weather .
When the men were hunting on the water , they wore waterproof parkas made from seal or sea-lion guts , or the entrails of bear , walrus , or whales .
Parkas had a hood that could be cinched , as could the wrist openings , so water could not get in .
Men wore breeches made from the esophageal skin of seals .
Children wore parkas made of downy eagle skin with tanned bird skin caps .
They called these parkas "kameikas , " meaning raingear in the English language .( Aleut
Sea-lions , harbor seals , and the sea otters are the most abundant marine mammals .
The men brought home the skins and prepared them by soaking them in urine and stretching them .
The women undertook the sewing ( "Enthnohistory : " Gross & Khera pg .
Preparation of the gut for clothing involved several steps .
A bone knife was used to remove the muscle tissue and fat from the walls of the intestine .
The gut was cut and stretched , and fastened to stakes to dry .
It was then cut and sewn to make waterproof parkas , bags , and other receptacles ( Turner , Ch . 5 , pg .
On some hunting trips , the men would take several women with them .
They would catch birds and prepare the carcasses and feathers for future use .
They caught Puffins , Lunda Cirrhata , Fratercula Corniculata , Guillemots , and Cephus & Murres .
It took 40 skins of tufted puffin and 60 skins of horned puffin to make one parka .
A woman would need a year for all the labor to make one parka .
All parkas were decorated with bird feathers , beard bristles of seal and sea-lion , beaks of sea parrots , bird claws , sea otter fur , dyed leather , and caribou hair sewn in the seams .
Women made needles from the wingbones of seabirds .
They made thread from the sinews of different animals and fish guts .
A thin strip of seal intestine could also be used , twisted to form a thread .
The women grew their thumbnail extra long and sharpened it .
They could split threads to make them as fine as a hair .
They used vermilion paint , hematite , the ink bag of the octopus , and the root of a kind of grass or vine to color the threads .
The interior regions of the rough , mountainous Aleutian Islands provided little in terms of natural resources for the Aleutian people .
They collected stones for weapons , tools , stoves or lamps .
They collected and dried grasses for their woven baskets .
For everything else , the Aleuts had learned to use the fish and mammals they caught and processed to satisfy their needs .
In order to hunt sea mammals and to travel between islands , the Aleuts became experts of sailing and navigation .
For regular travel , they used their large baidaras .
The baidara was a large , open , walrus-skin-covered boat .
Aleut families used it when traveling among the islands .
It was also used to transport goods for trade , and warriors took them to battle .
The baidarka ( small skin boat ) was a small boat covered in sea lion skin .
It was developed and used for hunting because of its sturdiness and maneuverability .
The Aleut baidarka resembles that of a Yup'ik kayak , but it is aerodynamically sleeker and faster .
They made the baidarka for one or two persons only .
The deck was made with a sturdy chamber , the sides of the craft were nearly vertical and the bottom was rounded .
Most one-man baidarkas were about feet long and wide , whereas a two-man was on average about long and wide .
It was from the baidarka that Aleut men would stand on the water to hunt from the sea .
The Aleuts hunted small sea mammals with barbed darts and harpoons slung from throwing boards .
These boards gave precision as well as some extra distance to these weapons .
Harpoons were also called throwing-arrows when the pointed head fit loosely into the socket of the foreshaft and the head was able to detach from the harpoon when it penetrated an animal , and remain in the wound .
There were three main kinds of harpoon that the Aleut’s used : a simple harpoon , with a head that kept its original position in the animal after striking , a compound ( toggle-head ) harpoon in which the head took a horizontal position in the animal after penetration , and the throwing-lance used to kill large animals .
The simple Aleut harpoon consisted of four main parts : the wooden shaft , the bone foreshaft , and the bonehead (tip ) with barbs pointed backward .
The barbed head was loosely fitted into the socket of the foreshaft so that when the animal was stabbed , it pulled the head away from the rest of the harpoon .
The sharp barbs penetrated with ease , but could not be pulled out .
The bone tip is fastened to a length of braided twine meanwhile ; the hunter held the other end of the twine in his hand .
The compound harpoon was the most prevalent weapon of the Aleut people .
Also known as the toggle-head spear , it was about the same size as the simple harpoon and used to hunt the same animals , however , this harpoon provided a more efficient and lethal weapon .
The longest part was the shaft with the thicker stalk closer to the tip of the harpoon .
The shaft was fitted into the socket of the fore shaft and a bone ring was then placed over the joint to hold the two pieces together , as well as , protecting the wooden shaft from splitting .
Connected to the fore shaft of the harpoon is the toggle head spear tip .
This tip was made of two sub shafts that break apart on impact with an animal .
The upper sub shaft held the razor stone head and attached to the lower sub shaft with a small braided twine loop .
Once the tip penetrates the animal the upper sub head broke off from the rest of the shaft , however , since it was still connected with the braided loop it rotated the head into a horizontal position inside the animal’s body so that it could not get away from the hunter .
The throwing-lance may be distinguished from a harpoon because of the fact that all its pieces are fixed and immovable .
A lance is formerly a weapon of war and it was also used to kill large marine animals after it has already been harpooned .
The Throwing lance usually consisted of three parts : a wooden shaft , a bone ring or belt , and the compound head that was made with a barbed bonehead and a stone tip .
The length of the compound head was equivalent to the distance between the planes of a man’s chest to his back .
The lance would penetrate the chest and pass through the chest cavity and exit from the back .
The bone ring was designed to break after impact so that the shaft could be used again for another kill .
Archeologists have found many different types of burials , dating from a variety of periods , in the Aleutian Islands .
The Aleut developed a style of burials that were accommodated to local conditions , and honored the dead .
They have had four main types of burials : "umqan" , cave , above-ground sarcophagi , and burials connected to communal houses .
Umqan burials are the most widely known type of mortuary practice found in the Aleutian Islands .
The people created burial mounds , that tend to be located on the edge of a bluff .
They placed stone and earth over the mound to protect and mark it .
Such mounds were first excavated by archeologists in 1972 on Southwestern Unmak Island , and dated to the early contact period .
Researchers have found a prevalence of these umqan burials , and concluded it is a regional mortuary practice .
It may be considered a pan-Aleutian mortuary practice .
Cave burials have been found throughout the Eastern Aleutian Islands .
The human remains are buried in shallow graves at the rear of the cave .
These caves tend to be located next to middens and near villages .
Some grave goods have been found in the caves associated with such burials .
For example , a deconstructed boat was found in a burial cave on Kanaga Island .
There were no other major finds of grave goods in the vicinity .
Throughout the Aleutian Islands , gravesites have been found that are above-ground sarcophagi .
These sarcophagi are left exposed , with no attempt to bury the dead in the ground .
These burials tend to be isolated and limited to the remains of adult males , which may indicate a specific ritual practice .
In the Near Islands , isolated graves have also been found with the remains , and not just the sarcophagus , left exposed on the surface .
This way of erecting sarcophagi above ground is not as common as umqan and cave burials , but it is still widespread .
Another type of practice has been to bury remains in areas next to the communal houses of the settlement .
They indicate a pattern of burying the dead within the main activity areas of the settlement .
These burials consist of small pits adjacent to the houses and scattered around them .
In these instances , mass graves are common for women and children .
This type of mortuary practice has been mainly found in the Near Islands .
In addition to these four main types , other kinds of burials have been found in the Aleutian Islands .
These more isolated examples include mummification , private burial houses , abandoned houses , etc .
To date , such examples are not considered to be part of a larger , unifying tradition .
The findings discussed represent only the sites that have been excavated .
The variety of mortuary practices mostly did not included the ritual of including extensive grave goods , as has been found in other cultures .
The remains so far have been mainly found with other human and faunal remains .
The addition of objects to "accompany " the dead is rare .
Archaeologists have been trying to dissect the absence of a great tradition of grave goods , but findings have been ambiguous and do not really help the academic community to understand these practices more .
Not much information is known about the ritual parts of burying the dead .
Archeologists and anthropologists have not found much evidence related to burial rituals .
This lack of ritual evidence could hint at either no ritualized ceremony , or one that has not yet been revealed in the archaeological record .
As a result , archaeologists cannot decipher the context to understand exactly why a certain type of burial was used in particular cases .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Alcobaça ( ) is a city in Alcobaça Municipality in Oeste Subregion , formerly included in the Estremadura Province .
The city grew along the valleys of the rivers Alcoa and Baça , from which it derives its name .
The municipality has a total population of 55,269 inhabitants and a total area of .
The city itself has a population of 15,800 inhabitants .
The city of Alcobaça became notable after the first king of Portugal , Afonso Henriques , decided to build a church to commemorate the Conquest of Santarém from the Moors in 1147 .
The church later evolved into the Monastery of Alcobaça , one of the most magnificent gothic monuments in the country .
In the church are the tombs of Pedro I of Portugal and his murdered mistress Inês de Castro .
Over the centuries this monastery played an important role in shaping Portuguese culture .
A few kilometers to the north of Alcobaça is the Monastery of Batalha , another gothic building constructed in memory of a different important battle , that of Aljubarrota .
To the west of Alcobaça is the fishing village of Nazaré , now a popular resort town .
To the south is the city of Caldas da Rainha and the medieval town of Óbidos .
Also to the northeast is the town of Porto de Mós with its rebuilt castle .
A town that only became notable in the 12th century when it was chosen as the future site of Portugal 's largest church .
In March 1147 , the fledgling King Dom Afonso Henriques , defeated the Moors by capturing the city of Santarém .
As a tribute to his victory he vowed to build a magnificent home for the Order of Cistercians .
It took another 76 years before this task was completed .
The monarchy continued to carry out further construction and 60 years later King Dinis built the main cloister .
The church contains the tombs of Pedro I of Portugal and his murdered mistress Inês de Castro and with it the story of the tragic liaison between Pedro and Inês .
Forced at an early age as a royal duty , he was to marry Constanza , the " Infanta " ( Princess ) of Castile , but died shortly after the marriage .
Dom Pedro escape with his true love and later lived in the city of Coimbra .
His father , King Afonso IV , believing that the family of Inês was a threat to his own kingdom had her murdered .
Shortly after the death of his father Dom Pedro declared that he had married Inês in a prior secret ceremony in Bragança , and promptly took a gruesome revenge on the killers and exhumed her body .
He presented the embalmed corpse at the court with a crown on her head and demanded that all his courtiers kneel and individually pay homage to her decomposed hand .
Today , their ornate tombs face each other so that on Judgment Day his first sight would be of his beloved Inês .
During the following centuries the monks from this monastery had a major influene on the development of Portuguese culture .
Notably , in 1269 they were the first to give public lessons to their flock , and later they produced the first authoritative history on Portugal in a series of books .
In 1810 the invading French pillaged the Abbey taking with them most of its most important treasures , including the noteworthy library .
The items that remained were later stolen in 1834 during an anti-clerical riot and the banning of the religious Orders in Portugal .
The main feature of the city is essentially the monastery that proudly presents a long and sombre façade with 18th-century embellishments .
This austerity is further emphasized in the cloisters with its apt name of " Cloister of Silence " .
In contrast within the Abbey is the massive kitchen with a running stream specially diverted to pass through as a supply of fresh water .
The open area of the kitchen chimney is large enough to take a whole ox for roasting .
The surround to the sacristy doorway is an outstanding example of Manueline decoration .
In 1794 , Lord Beckford visited the Abbey and commented that he found some 300 monks "living in a very splendid manner " !
A few kilometers to the north of Alcobaça is another wondrous building constructed in memory of a different important battle , that of Aljubarrota in 1385 , when Dom João I of Portugal defeated the Castilians and ensuring two hundred years of independence from the Castilian invaders .
The construction of the Abbey at Batalha commenced in 1388 and was added to by various Portuguese Kings over these next two centuries .
To the east of Batalha is the world famous location of Fátima and a point of pilgrimage for the Roman Catholic religion due to the vision of the Virgin Mary in 1917 by three young children whilst tending their flock .
To the west of Alcobaça is the well-known fishing village of Nazaré .
Today , the village is now a small town and a popular holiday resort with most of its past and traditions having rapidly evaporated in the course of time .
A very successful Portuguese feature film was made in the early 20th century that dramatically captured the primitive and dangerous life of these fishermen .
Stoutly Catholic , the inhabitants have retained some of their past as can be still seen in their own particular style of costume .
To the south is Caldas da Rainha and the quaint medieval town of Óbidos that is an attraction for any tourists that enjoys a true glimpse of the past .
Also to the south is the town of Porto de Mós with its fanciful rebuilt castle .
This town borders the Nature Reserve Parque Natural das Serras de Aire e Candeeiros .
These 390 square kilometres of limestone-covered landscape is also known for its underground caverns .
The best known being the Grutas de Mira de Aire can be visited and consists of tunnels , caverns with stalactites , stalagmites , lakes , and a music and light finale .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Alexandria is a city in Monroe Township , Madison County , Indiana , United States .
It is part of the Anderson , Indiana Metropolitan Statistical Area .
According to the 2010 census , its population was 5,145 , a decrease of 17.8 % from 6,260 in 2000 .
According to the 2010 census , the city has a total area of , all land .
As of the census of 2010 , there were 5,145 people , 2,113 households , and 1,362 families residing in the city .
There were 2,507 housing units at an average density of .
The racial makeup of the city was 97.4 % White , 0.3 % African American , 0.1 % Native American , 0.2 % Asian , 0.8 % from other races , and 1.1 % from two or more races .
Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.7 % of the population .
There were 2,113 households of which 33.6 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 42.2 % were married couples living together , 15.7 % had a female householder with no husband present , 6.6 % had a male householder with no wife present , and 35.5 % were non-families .
30.1 % of all households were made up of individuals and 12.8 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older .
The average household size was 2.41 and the average family size was 2.95 .
The median age in the city was 38.2 years .
25.6 % of residents were under the age of 18 ; 8.8 % were between the ages of 18 and 24 ; 24.8 % were from 25 to 44 ; 25.1 % were from 45 to 64 ; and 15.6 % were 65 years of age or older .
The gender makeup of the city was 47.8 % male and 52.2 % female .
As of the census of 2000 , there were 6,260 people , 2,481 households , and 1,654 families residing in the city .
The population density was 2,308.6 people per square mile (891.9/km² ) .
There were 2,704 housing units at an average density of 997.2 per square mile ( 385.2/km² ) .
The racial makeup of the city was 98.10 % White , 0.46 % Black or African American , 0.08 % Native American , 0.11 % Asian , 0.02 % Pacific Islander , 0.43 % from other races , and 0.80 % from two or more races .
0.99 % of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race .
There were 2,481 households out of which 33.9 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 49.0 % were married couples living together , 12.7 % had a female householder with no husband present , and 33.3 % were non-families .
28.9 % of all households were made up of individuals and 13.1 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older .
The average household size was 2.48 and the average family size was 3.04 .
In the city the population was spread out with 27.8 % under the age of 18 , 8.9 % from 18 to 24 , 28.0 % from 25 to 44 , 19.5 % from 45 to 64 , and 15.9 % who were 65 years of age or older .
For every 100 females there were 91.4 males .
For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 87.4 males .
The median income for a household in the city was $ 35,359 , and the median income for a family was $ 42,731 .
Males had a median income of $ 30,529 versus $ 23,384 for females .
The per capita income for the city was $ 15,578 .
About 4.2 % of families and 7.0 % of the population were below the poverty line , including 4.1 % of those under age 18 and 15.0 % of those age 65 or over .
Five members are elected from individual districts and two are elected at-large .
The city is governed by a " strong " mayor system who appoints two council members and/or city residents to serve at the mayor 's pleasure on the board of public works and safety .
The clerk-treasure and mayor are full-time elected officials .
The Alexandria City Court has a part-time locally elected judge .
Alexandria Airport is a public use airport located southeast of the central business district of Alexandria .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Arithmetic or arithmetics ( from the Greek word ἀριθμός , "arithmos " "number " ) is the oldest and most elementary branch of mathematics , used very popularly , for tasks ranging from simple day-to-day counting to advanced science and business calculations .
It involves the study of quantity , especially as the result of operations that combine numbers .
In common usage , it refers to the simpler properties when using the traditional operations of addition , subtraction , multiplication and division with smaller values of numbers .
Professional mathematicians sometimes use the term " (higher ) arithmetic " when referring to more advanced results related to number theory , but this should not be confused with elementary arithmetic .
The prehistory of arithmetic is limited to a small number of artifacts which may indicate the conception of addition and subtraction , the best-known being the Ishango bone from central Africa , dating from somewhere between 20,000 and 18,000 BC , although its interpretation is disputed .
The earliest written records indicate the Egyptians and Babylonians used all the elementary arithmetic operations as early as 2000 BC .
These artifacts do not always reveal the specific process used for solving problems , but the characteristics of the particular numeral system strongly influence the complexity of the methods .
The hieroglyphic system for Egyptian numerals , like the later Roman numerals , descended from tally marks used for counting .
In both cases , this origin resulted in values that used a decimal base but did not include positional notation .
Complex calculations with Roman numerals required the assistance of a counting board or the Roman abacus to obtain the results .
Early number systems that included positional notation were not decimal , including the sexagesimal ( base 60 ) system for Babylonian numerals and the vigesimal ( base 20 ) system that defined Maya numerals .
Because of this place-value concept , the ability to reuse the same digits for different values contributed to simpler and more efficient methods of calculation .
The continuous historical development of modern arithmetic starts with the Hellenistic civilization of ancient Greece , although it originated much later than the Babylonian and Egyptian examples .
Prior to the works of Euclid around 300 BC , Greek studies in mathematics overlapped with philosophical and mystical beliefs .
For example , Nicomachus summarized the viewpoint of the earlier Pythagorean approach to numbers , and their relationships to each other , in his " Introduction to Arithmetic" .
Greek numerals were used by Archimedes , Diophantus and others in a positional notation not very different from ours .
Because the ancient Greeks lacked a symbol for zero (until the Hellenistic period ) , they used three separate sets of symbols .
One set for the unit 's place , one for the ten 's place , and one for the hundred 's .
Then for the thousand 's place they would reuse the symbols for the unit 's place , and so on .
Their addition algorithm was identical to ours , and their multiplication algorithm was only very slightly different .
Their long division algorithm was the same , and the square root algorithm that was once taught in school was known to Archimedes , who may have invented it .
He preferred it to Hero 's method of successive approximation because , once computed , a digit does n't change , and the square roots of perfect squares , such as 7485696 , terminate immediately as 2736 .
For numbers with a fractional part , such as 546.934 , they used negative powers of 60 instead of negative powers of 10 for the fractional part 0.934 .
The ancient Chinese used a similar positional notation .
Because they also lacked a symbol for zero , they had one set of symbols for the unit 's place , and a second set for the ten 's place .
For the hundred 's place they then reused the symbols for the unit 's place , and so on .
Their symbols were based on the ancient counting rods .
It is a complicated question to determine exactly when the Chinese started calculating with positional representation , but it was definitely before 400 BC .
The Bishop of Syria , Severus Sebokht ( 650 AD) , " Indians possess a method of calculation that no word can praise enough .
Their rational system of mathematics , or of their method of calculation .
Leonardo of Pisa in 1200 AD wrote in " Liber Abaci" " The method of the Indians ( Modus Indoram ) surpasses any known method to compute .
They do their computations using nine figures and symbol zero" .
The gradual development of Hindu–Arabic numerals independently devised the place-value concept and positional notation , which combined the simpler methods for computations with a decimal base and the use of a digit representing 0. This allowed the system to consistently represent both large and small integers .
In the early the Indian mathematician Aryabhata incorporated an existing version of this system in his work , and experimented with different notations .
In the 7th century , Brahmagupta established the use of 0 as a separate number and determined the results for multiplication , division , addition and subtraction of zero and all other numbers , except for the result of division by 0. His contemporary , the Syriac bishop Severus Sebokht described the excellence of this system as " ... valuable methods of calculation which surpass description " .
The Arabs also learned this new method and called it "hesab" .
Although the Codex Vigilanus described an early form of Arabic numerals ( omitting 0) by 976 AD , Fibonacci was primarily responsible for spreading their use throughout Europe after the publication of his book " Liber Abaci" in 1202 .
He considered the significance of this "new " representation of numbers , which he styled the " Method of the Indians " ( Latin " Modus Indorum" ) , so fundamental that all related mathematical foundations , including the results of Pythagoras and the algorism describing the methods for performing actual calculations , were "almost a mistake " in comparison .
In the Middle Ages , arithmetic was one of the seven liberal arts taught in universities .
The flourishing of algebra in the medieval Islamic world and in Renaissance Europe was an outgrowth of the enormous simplification of computation through decimal notation .
Various types of tools exist to assist in numeric calculations .
Examples include slide rules ( for multiplication , division , and trigonometry ) and nomographs in addition to the electrical calculator .
The basic arithmetic operations are addition , subtraction , multiplication and division , although this subject also includes more advanced operations , such as manipulations of percentages , square roots , exponentiation , and logarithmic functions .
Arithmetic is performed according to an order of operations .
Any set of objects upon which all four arithmetic operations ( except division by 0) can be performed , and where these four operations obey the usual laws , is called a field .
In its simplest form , addition combines two numbers , the "addends " or "terms " , into a single number , the " sum " of the numbers ( Such as or ) .
Adding more than two numbers can be viewed as repeated addition ; this procedure is known as summation and includes ways to add infinitely many numbers in an infinite series ; repeated addition of the number 1 is the most basic form of counting .
Addition is commutative and associative so the order the terms are added in does not matter .
The identity element of addition ( the additive identity ) is 0, that is , adding 0 to any number yields that same number .
Also , the inverse element of addition ( the additive inverse ) is the opposite of any number , that is , adding the opposite of any number to the number itself yields the additive identity , 0.
For example , the opposite of 7 is −7 , so .
Addition can be given geometrically as in the following example :
Subtraction finds the "difference " between two numbers , the "minuend " minus the " subtrahend " .
If the minuend is larger than the subtrahend , the difference is positive ; if the minuend is smaller than the subtrahend , the difference is negative ; if they are equal , the difference is 0.
For that reason , it is often helpful to look at subtraction as addition of the minuend and the opposite of the subtrahend , that is .
When written as a sum , all the properties of addition hold .
There are several methods for calculating results , some of which are particularly advantageous to machine calculation .
For example , digital computers employ the method of two 's complement .
Of great importance is the counting up method by which change is made .
Suppose an amount " P" is given to pay the required amount " Q" , with " P" greater than " Q" .
Rather than performing the subtraction and counting out that amount in change , money is counted out starting at " Q " and continuing until reaching " P" .
Although the amount counted out must equal the result of the subtraction , the subtraction was never really done and the value of might still be unknown to the change-maker .
Multiplication is the second basic operation of arithmetic .
Multiplication also combines two numbers into a single number , the "product" .
The two original numbers are called the "multiplier " and the "multiplicand" , sometimes both simply called "factors " .
Multiplication is best viewed as a scaling operation .
If the numbers are imagined as lying in a line , multiplication by a number , say " x" , greater than 1 is the same as stretching everything away from 0 uniformly , in such a way that the number 1 itself is stretched to where " x " was .
Similarly , multiplying by a number less than 1 can be imagined as squeezing towards 0.
( Again , in such a way that 1 goes to the multiplicand . )
Multiplication is commutative and associative ; further it is distributive over addition and subtraction .
The multiplicative identity is 1 , that is , multiplying any number by 1 yields that same number .
Also , the multiplicative inverse is the reciprocal of any number ( except 0 ; 0 is the only number without a multiplicative inverse ) , that is , multiplying the reciprocal of any number by the number itself yields the multiplicative identity .
The product of " a " and " b " is written as or .
When " a " or " b " are expressions not written simply with digits , it is also written by simple juxtaposition : "ab" .
In computer programming languages and software packages in which one can only use characters normally found on a keyboard , it is often written with an asterisk :
Division finds the "quotient " of two numbers , the "dividend " divided by the "divisor" .
For distinct positive numbers , if the dividend is larger than the divisor , the quotient is greater than 1 , otherwise it is less than 1 ( a similar rule applies for negative numbers ) .
The quotient multiplied by the divisor always yields the dividend .
As it is helpful to look at subtraction as addition , it is helpful to look at division as multiplication of the dividend times the reciprocal of the divisor , that is When written as a product , it obeys all the properties of multiplication .
Decimal representation refers exclusively , in common use , to the written numeral system employing arabic numerals as the digits for a radix 10 ( "decimal" ) positional notation ; however , any numeral system based on powers of 10 , e.g. , Greek , Cyrillic , Roman , or Chinese numerals may conceptually be described as "decimal notation " or "decimal representation " .
Modern methods for four fundamental operations (addition , subtraction , multiplication and division ) were first devised by Brahmagupta of India .
This was known during medieval Europe as " Modus Indoram " or Method of the Indians .
Positional notation ( also known as "place-value notation " ) refers to the representation or encoding of numbers using the same symbol for the different orders of magnitude ( e .g. , the "ones place " , "tens place " , "hundreds place " ) and , with a radix point , using those same symbols to represent fractions ( e .g. , the "tenths place " , "hundredths place " ) .
For example , 507.36 denotes 5 hundreds ( 102 ) , plus 0 tens ( 101 ) , plus 7 units ( 100 ) , plus 3 tenths ( 10−1 ) plus 6 hundredths ( 10−2 ) .
The concept of 0 as a number comparable to the other basic digits is essential to this notation , as is the concept of 0 's use as a placeholder , and as is the definition of multiplication and addition with 0.
The use of 0 as a placeholder and , therefore , the use of a positional notation is first attested to in the Jain text from India entitled the " Lokavibhâga" , dated 458 AD and it was only in the early 13th century that these concepts , transmitted via the scholarship of the Arabic world , were introduced into Europe by Fibonacci using the Hindu–Arabic numeral system .
Algorism comprises all of the rules for performing arithmetic computations using this type of written numeral .
For example , addition produces the sum of two arbitrary numbers .
The result is calculated by the repeated addition of single digits from each number that occupies the same position , proceeding from right to left .
An addition table with ten rows and ten columns displays all possible values for each sum .
If an individual sum exceeds the value 9 , the result is represented with two digits .
The rightmost digit is the value for the current position , and the result for the subsequent addition of the digits to the left increases by the value of the second ( leftmost ) digit , which is always one .
This adjustment is termed a " carry " of the value 1 .
The process for multiplying two arbitrary numbers is similar to the process for addition .
A multiplication table with ten rows and ten columns lists the results for each pair of digits .
If an individual product of a pair of digits exceeds 9 , the " carry " adjustment increases the result of any subsequent multiplication from digits to the left by a value equal to the second ( leftmost ) digit , which is any value from ( ) .
The creation of a correct process for multiplication relies on the relationship between values of adjacent digits .
The value for any single digit in a numeral depends on its position .
Also , each position to the left represents a value ten times larger than the position to the right .
In mathematical terms , the exponent for the radix ( base ) of 10 increases by 1 ( to the left ) or decreases by 1 ( to the right ) .
Therefore , the value for any arbitrary digit is multiplied by a value of the form 10"n " with integer " n" .
The list of values corresponding to all possible positions for a single digit is written
Repeated multiplication of any value in this list by 10 produces another value in the list .
In mathematical terminology , this characteristic is defined as closure , and the previous list is described as closed under multiplication .
It is the basis for correctly finding the results of multiplication using the previous technique .
This outcome is one example of the uses of number theory .
Compound unit arithmetic is the application of arithmetic operations to mixed radix quantities such as feet and inches , gallons and pints , pounds shillings and pence , and so on .
Prior to the use of decimal-based systems of money and units of measure , the use of compound unit arithmetic formed a significant part of commerce and industry .
The techniques used for compound unit arithmetic were developed over many centuries and are well-documented in many textbooks in many different languages .
In addition to the basic arithmetic functions encountered in decimal arithmetic , compound unit arithmetic employs three more functions :
Knowledge of the relationship between the various units of measure , their multiples and their submultiples forms an essential part of compound unit arithmetic .
There are two basic approaches to compound unit arithmetic :
During the 19th and 20th centuries various aids were developed to aid the manipulation of compound units , particularly in commercial applications .
The most common aids were mechanical tills which were adapted in countries such as the United Kingdom to accommodate pounds , shillings , pennies and farthings and " Ready Reckoners " – books aimed at traders that catalogued the results of various routine calculations such as the percentages or multiples of various sums of money .
One typical booklet that ran to 150 pages tabulated multiples "from one to ten thousand at the various prices from one farthing to one pound " .
The cumbersome nature of compound unit arithmetic has been recognized for many years – in 1586 , the Flemish mathematician Simon Stevin published a small pamphlet called " De Thiende " ( " the tenth" ) in which he declared that the universal introduction of decimal coinage , measures , and weights to be merely a question of time while in the modern era , many conversion programs , such as that embedded in the calculator supplied as a standard part of the Microsoft Windows 7 operating system display compound units in a reduced decimal format rather than using an expanded format ( i .e .
This includes the properties of integers related to primality , divisibility , and the solution of equations in integers , as well as modern research that is an outgrowth of this study .
It is in this context that one runs across the fundamental theorem of arithmetic and arithmetic functions .
" A Course in Arithmetic " by Jean-Pierre Serre reflects this usage , as do such phrases such as "first-order arithmetic " or "arithmetical algebraic geometry " .
Number theory is also referred to as " the higher arithmetic" , as in the title of Harold Davenport 's book on the subject .
Primary education in mathematics often places a strong focus on algorithms for the arithmetic of natural numbers , integers , fractions , and decimals (using the decimal place-value system ) .
The difficulty and unmotivated appearance of these algorithms has long led educators to question this curriculum , advocating the early teaching of more central and intuitive mathematical ideas .
One notable movement in this direction was the New Math of the 1960s and 1970s , which attempted to teach arithmetic in the spirit of axiomatic development from set theory , an echo of the prevailing trend in higher mathematics .
Also , arithmetic was used by Islamic Scholars in order to teach application of the rulings related to Zakat and Irth .
This was done in a book entitled " The Best of Arithmetic " by Abd-al-Fattah-al-Dumyati .
The book begins with the foundations of mathematics and proceeds to its application in the later chapters .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Advanced power management ( APM) is an API developed by Intel and Microsoft and released in 1992 which enables an operating system running an IBM-compatible personal computer to work with the BIOS ( part of the computer 's firmware ) to achieve power management .
Revision 1.2 was the last version of the APM specification , released in 1996 .
ACPI is intended as the successor to APM.
Microsoft dropped support for APM in Windows Vista .
The Linux kernel still mostly supports APM , with the last fully functional APM support shipping in 3.3 .
APM uses a layered approach to manage devices .
APM-aware applications ( which include device drivers ) talk to an OS-specific APM driver .
This driver communicates to the APM-aware BIOS , which controls the hardware .
There is the ability to opt-out of APM control on a device-by-device basis , which can be used if a driver wants to communicate directly with a hardware device .
Communication occurs both ways ; power management events are sent from the BIOS to the APM driver , and the APM driver sends information and requests to the BIOS via function calls .
In this way the APM driver is an intermediary between the BIOS and the operating system .
Power management happens in two ways ; through the above mentioned function calls from the APM driver to the BIOS requesting power state changes , and automatically based on device activity .
There are 12 power events ( such as standby , suspend and resume requests , and low battery notifications ) , plus OEM-defined events , that can be sent from the APM BIOS to the operating system .
The APM driver regularly polls for event change notifications .
There are 21 APM function calls defined that the APM driver can use to query power management statuses , or request power state transitions .
Example function calls include letting the BIOS know about current CPU usage ( the BIOS may respond to such a call by placing the CPU in a low-power state , or returning it to its full-power state ) , retrieving the current power state of a device , or requesting a power state change .
The APM specification defines system power states and device power states .
APM defines five power states for the computer system :
APM also defines power states that APM-aware hardware can implement .
There is no requirement that an APM-aware device implement all states .
The CPU core ( defined in APM as the CPU clock , cache , system bus and system timers ) is treated specially in APM , as it is the last device to be powered down , and the first device to be powered back up .
The CPU core is always controlled through the APM BIOS ( there is no option to control it through a driver ) .
Drivers can use APM function calls to notify the BIOS about CPU usage , but it is up to the BIOS to act on this information ; a driver cannot directly tell the CPU to go into a power saving state .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
In abstract algebra , an alternative algebra is an algebra in which multiplication need not be associative , only alternative .
Every associative algebra is obviously alternative , but so too are some strictly non-associative algebras such as the octonions .
The sedenions , on the other hand , are not alternative .
Alternative algebras are so named because they are precisely the algebras for which the associator is alternating .
The associator is a trilinear map given by
By definition a multilinear map is alternating if it vanishes whenever two of its arguments are equal .
The left and right alternative identities for an algebra are equivalent to
Both of these identities together imply that the associator is totally skew-symmetric .
The associator of an alternative algebra is therefore alternating .
Conversely , any algebra whose associator is alternating is clearly alternative .
By symmetry , any algebra which satisfies any two of :
is alternative and therefore satisfies all three identities .
The converse holds so long as the characteristic of the base field is not 2.
Artin 's theorem states that in an alternative algebra the subalgebra generated by any two elements is associative .
Conversely , any algebra for which this is true is clearly alternative .
It follows that expressions involving only two variables can be written without parenthesis unambiguously in an alternative algebra .
A generalization of Artin 's theorem states that whenever three elements formula_12 in an alternative algebra associate ( i .e .
formula_13 ) the subalgebra generated by those elements is associative .
A corollary of Artin 's theorem is that alternative algebras are power-associative , that is , the subalgebra generated by a single element is associative .
The converse need not hold : the sedenions are power-associative but not alternative .
In a unital alternative algebra , multiplicative inverses are unique whenever they exist .
Moreover , for any invertible element formula_17 and all formula_18 one has
This is equivalent to saying the associator formula_20 vanishes for all such formula_17 and formula_18 .
If formula_17 and formula_18 are invertible then formula_25 is also invertible with inverse formula_26 .
The set of all invertible elements is therefore closed under multiplication and forms a Moufang loop .
This "loop of units " in an alternative ring or algebra is analogous to the group of units in an associative ring or algebra .
The projective plane over any alternative division ring is a Moufang plane .
The close relationship of alternative algebras and composition algebras was given by Guy Roos in 2008 : He shows ( page 162 ) the relation for an algebra " A" with unit element "e " and an involutive anti-automorphism formula_27 such that " a " + " a" * and " aa" * are on the line spanned by "e " for all " a " in " A" .
Then if " n " is a non-singular mapping into the field of " A" , and " A" is alternative , then ( "A ,n" ) is a composition algebra .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Arlo Davy Guthrie ( born July 10 , 1947 ) is an American folk singer .
Like his late father , Woody Guthrie , Arlo is known for singing songs of protest against social injustice .
Guthrie 's best-known work is " Alice 's Restaurant Massacree" , a satirical talking blues song about 18 minutes in length .
His song " Massachusetts " was named the official folk song of the state in which he has lived most of his adult life .
Arlo Guthrie was born in Brooklyn , New York , the son of folk singer and composer Woody Guthrie and his wife Marjorie Mazia Guthrie .
His mother was a one-time professional dancer with the Martha Graham Company and founder of the Committee to Combat Huntington 's disease , the disease that took Woody 's life in 1967 .
His father was from a Protestant family and his mother was Jewish .
His maternal grandmother was renowned Yiddish poet Aliza Greenblatt .
Guthrie received religious training for his bar mitzvah from Rabbi Meir Kahane , who would go on to form the Jewish Defense League .
" Rabbi Kahane was a really nice , patient teacher , " Guthrie later recalled , " but shortly after he started giving me my lessons , he started going haywire .
Guthrie attended Woodward School in Clinton Hill , Brooklyn 1st through 8th grades and later graduated from the Stockbridge School , in Stockbridge , Massachusetts , in 1965 , and briefly attended Rocky Mountain College in Billings , Montana .
He received an Honorary Doctorate from Westfield State College , in 2008 .
As a singer , songwriter and lifelong political activist , Guthrie carries on the legacy of his legendary father .
He was awarded the Peace Abbey Courage of Conscience award on September 26 , 1992 .
His most famous work is " Alice 's Restaurant Massacree" , a talking blues song that lasts 18 minutes and 34 seconds in its original recorded version .
Guthrie has pointed out that this was also the exact length of one of the famous gaps in Richard Nixon 's Watergate tapes .
He has been known to spin the story out to forty-five minutes in concert .
The Alice in the song is Alice Brock , who had been librarian at Arlo 's boarding school in town before opening her restaurant , and who now owns an art studio in Provincetown , Massachusetts .
However , Guthrie stated in a 2009 interview with Ron Bennington that the song is more an "anti-stupidity " song than an anti-war song , adding that it is based on a true incident .
In the song , Guthrie is called up for a draft examination , and rejected as unfit for military service as a result of a criminal record consisting in its entirety of a single arrest , court appearance , fine , and clean-up order for littering and creating a public nuisance on Thanksgiving Day in 1965 , when Arlo was 18 years old .
Alice and her restaurant make up the recurrent refrain , but barely figure in the story .
On the DVD commentary for the 1969 movie , Guthrie states that the events presented in the song all actually happened .
For a short period after its release in 1967 , " Alice 's Restaurant " was heavily played on U.S. college and counterculture radio stations .
It became a symbol of the late 1960s and for many it defined an attitude and lifestyle that were lived out across the country in the ensuing years .
Its leisurely , sassy finger-picking acoustic guitar and rambling lyrics were widely memorized and played by irreverent youth .
Many stations across the States have made playing " Alice 's Restaurant " a Thanksgiving Day tradition .
A 1969 film , directed and co-written by Arthur Penn , was based on the true story told in the song , but with the addition of a large number of fictional scenes .
This film , also called " Alice 's Restaurant" , featured Arlo portraying himself .
The part of his father Woody Guthrie , who had died in 1967 , was played by an actor , Joseph Boley .
Despite its popularity , the song " Alice 's Restaurant Massacree " is not always featured on the set list of any given Guthrie performance .
The " Alice 's Restaurant " song was one of a few very long songs to become popular just when albums began replacing hit singles as young people 's main music listening .
But in 1972 Guthrie had a highly successful single too , Steve Goodman 's song " City of New Orleans " , a wistful paean to long-distance passenger rail travel .
Guthrie 's first trip on that train was in December 2005 ( when his family joined other musicians on a train trip across the country to raise money for musicians financially devastated by Hurricane Katrina and Hurricane Rita , in the South of the United States ) .
He also had a minor hit with his song " Coming into Los Angeles " , which was played at the 1969 Woodstock Festival , and success with a live version of " The Motorcycle Song" .
In the fall of 1975 during a benefit concert in Massachusetts , Arlo Guthrie performed with his band Shenandoah in public for the first time .
They continued to tour and record throughout the 1970s until the early 1990s .
Although the band received good reviews , it never gained the popularity that Guthrie did while playing solo .
This band is not to be confused with the popular country music group Shenandoah , an entirely different group that had musical hits from 1986 to 2006 .
Arlo Guthrie 's band Shenandoah consisted ( after 1976 ) of David Grover , Steve Ide , Carol Ide , Terry A La Berry and Dan Velika .
Guthrie 's 1976 album " Amigo " received a 5-star ( highest rating ) from " Rolling Stone" , and may be his best-received work .
However , that album , like Guthrie 's earlier Warner Bros. Records albums , is rarely heard today even though each contains strong folk and folk rock music accompanied by widely regarded musicians such as Ry Cooder .
A number of musicians from a variety of genres have joined Guthrie onstage , including Pete Seeger , David Bromberg , Cyril Neville , Emmylou Harris , Willie Nelson , Judy Collins , John Prine , Wesley Gray , Josh Ritter , and others .
Though Guthrie is best known for being a musician , singer , and composer , throughout the years he has also appeared as an actor in films and on television .
The film " Alice 's Restaurant " ( 1969 ) is his best known role , but he has had small parts in several films and even co-starred in a television drama , " Byrds of Paradise " .
Guthrie has had minor roles in several movies and television series .
Usually , he has appeared as himself , often performing music and/or being interviewed about the 1960s , folk music and various social causes .
His television appearances have included a broad range of programs from " The Muppet Show " ( 1979 ) to " Politically Incorrect " ( 1998 ) .
A rare dramatic film part was in the 1992 movie " Roadside Prophets " .
Guthrie 's memorable appearance at the 1969 Woodstock Festival was documented in the Michael Wadleigh film " Woodstock" .
Guthrie also made a pilot for a TV variety show called " The Arlo Guthrie Show " in February , 1987 .
The hour-long program included story telling and musical performances and was filmed in Austin , Texas .
Special guests were Pete Seeger , Bonnie Raitt , David Bromberg and Jerry Jeff Walker .
In earlier years , at least from the 1960s to the 1980s , Guthrie had taken a decidedly leftist approach to American politics .
In his often lengthy comments during concerts his expressed positions were consistently anti-war , anti-Nixon , pro-drugs and in favor of making nuclear power illegal .
However , he apparently regarded himself as more an individualist than the major youth culture spokesperson he had been regarded as by the media , as evidenced by the lyrics in his 1979 song " Prologue " : " I can remember all of your smiles during the demonstrations , ... and together we sang our victory songs though we were worlds apart . "
In 1984 , he was the featured celebrity in George McGovern 's campaign for the Democratic presidential nomination in Guthrie 's home state of Massachusetts , performing at rallies and receptions .
Guthrie endorsed Texas Congressman Ron Paul for the 2008 Republican Party nomination .
Dr. Paul is the only candidate I know of who would have signed the Constitution of the United States had he been there .
I 'm with him , because he seems to be the only candidate who actually believes it has as much relevance today as it did a couple of hundred years ago .
I look forward to the day when we can work out the differences we have with the same revolutionary vision and enthusiasm that is our American legacy . "
He told " The New York Times Magazine " that he is a Republican because , " We had enough good Democrats .
About once a month , Guthrie posts short writings to the Announcements area of www.arlo.net ,
Like his father , Woody Guthrie , Guthrie often sings songs of protest against social injustice .
He collaborated with poet Adrian Mitchell to tell the story of Chilean folk singer and activist Víctor Jara in song .
He regularly performed with folk musician Pete Seeger , one of his father 's longtime partners .
Ramblin' Jack Elliott , who had lived for two years in the Guthries ' home before Arlo left for boarding school , had absorbed Woody 's style perhaps better than anyone ; Arlo has been said to have credited Elliott for passing it along to him .
In 1991 , Guthrie bought the church that had served as Alice and Ray Brock 's former home in Great Barrington , Massachusetts , and converted it to the Guthrie Center , an interfaith meeting place that serves people of all religions .
The center provides weekly free lunches in the community and support for families living with HIV/AIDS as well as other life-threatening illnesses .
It also hosts a summertime concert series and Guthrie does six or seven fund raising shows there every year .
There are several annual events such as the Walk-A-Thon to Cure Huntington 's Disease and a " Thanksgiving Dinner That Can't Be Beat " for families , friends , doctors and scientists who live and work with Huntington 's disease .
Guthrie resides in the town of Washington , Massachusetts where he and Jackie Hyde , his wife of 43 years , were long time residents .
Jackie died on October 14 , 2012 after a brief battle with liver cancer .
He also has a home in Sebastian , Florida .
Guthrie 's son Abe Guthrie and his daughters Annie , Sarah Lee Guthrie and Cathy Guthrie have also become musicians .
Annie Guthrie writes songs and performs , and also takes care of family touring details .
Sarah Lee performs and records with her husband Johnny Irion .
Cathy plays ukulele in Folk Uke , a group she formed with Amy Nelson , the daughter of Willie Nelson .
Abe Guthrie was formerly in a folk-rock band called Xavier , and now tours with his father .
Abe Guthrie 's son , Krishna , is a drummer and toured with Arlo Guthrie on his European tour in 2006 and played guitar for the 2009–2010 Tour .
Krishna plays drums in Modest Me and aspires to be the lead of his own band some day .
Arlo Guthrie is a grandfather of Abe 's son Krishna and daughter Serena , Annie 's son Shiva Das ( Mo ) and daughter Jacklyn , Sarah Lee 's daughters Olivia Nora and Sophia Irion and Cathy 's daughter Marjorie Maybelle Midwood .
Arlo Guthrie is mentioned in Tim Winton 's novel " The Riders " – shortlisted for the Booker Prize in 1995 .
A character in the novel overhears locals in the small Irish town of Shinrone , recount the night Arlo Guthrie came to play .
The actual event occurred in February 1988 , when Arlo played the local gymnasium in Shinrone , County Offaly .
The concert was organised by a local postman , Tom Stapleton .
The character of Professor Sonek Pran in " " by Keith R. A. DeCandido is based on Arlo Guthrie .
The acknowledgements of the book thank Arlo for inspiring the personality and physical traits for the character and for his music inspiring the writer .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Belgium ( ; Dutch : " België " ; French : " Belgique " ; German : " Belgien " ) , officially the Kingdom of Belgium , is a federal monarchy in Western Europe .
It is a founding member of the European Union and hosts the EU 's headquarters as well as those of several other major international organisations such as NATO .
Belgium covers an area of , and it has a population of about 11 million people .
Straddling the cultural boundary between Germanic and Latin Europe , Belgium is home to two main linguistic groups : the Dutch-speaking , mostly Flemish community ( which constitutes about 59 % of the population ) , and the French-speaking , mostly Walloon population ( which comprises 41 % of all Belgians ) .
Additionally , there is a small group of German-speakers who are officially recognized .
Belgium 's two largest regions are the Dutch-speaking region of Flanders in the north and the French-speaking southern region of Wallonia .
The Brussels-Capital Region , officially bilingual , is a mostly French-speaking enclave within the Flemish Region .*
Belgium 's linguistic diversity and related political conflicts are reflected in its political history and complex system of government .
Historically , Belgium , the Netherlands and Luxembourg were known as the Low Countries , which used to cover a somewhat larger area than the current Benelux group of states .
The region was called Belgica in Latin , after the Roman province of Gallia Belgica , which covered more or less the same area .
From the end of the Middle Ages until the 17th century , the area of Belgium was a prosperous and cosmopolitan centre of commerce and culture .
From the 16th century until the Belgian Revolution in 1830 , when Belgium seceded from the Netherlands , the area of Belgium served as the battleground between many European powers , causing it to be dubbed the " Battlefield of Europe , "*
Upon its independence , Belgium participated in the Industrial Revolution
and , during the course of the 20th century , possessed a number of colonies in Africa .
The second half of the 20th century was marked by rising tensions between the Flemish and the Francophones fueled by differences in language and the unequal economic development of Flanders and Wallonia .
This continuing antagonism has led to several far-reaching reforms , a transition from a unitary to a federal arrangement .
The formation of the last federal government in 2010 lasted 18 months .
The name ' Belgium ' is derived from " Gallia Belgica" , a Roman province in the northernmost part of Gaul that before Roman invasion in 100 BC , was inhabited by the " Belgae" , a mix of Celtic and Germanic peoples .
A gradual immigration by Germanic Frankish tribes during the 5th century brought the area under the rule of the Merovingian kings .
A gradual shift of power during the 8th century led the kingdom of the Franks to evolve into the Carolingian Empire .Ib .
e-book ( 2004 ) NetLibrary , Boulder , Colorado , United States , ISBN 0-8204-7283-2 print edition ( [http ://isbndb.com/d/book/belgium_a_history .html
The Treaty of Verdun in 843 divided the region into Middle and West Francia and therefore into a set of more or less independent fiefdoms which , during the Middle Ages , were vassals either of the King of France or of the Holy Roman Emperor .
Many of these fiefdoms were united in the Burgundian Netherlands of the 14th and 15th centuries .
Emperor Charles V extended the personal union of the Seventeen Provinces in the 1540s , making it far more than a personal union by the Pragmatic Sanction of 1549 and increased his influence over the Prince-Bishopric of Liège .
The Eighty Years ' War ( 1568–1648 ) divided the Low Countries into the northern United Provinces ( " Belgica Foederata " in Latin , the " Federated Netherlands " ) and the Southern Netherlands ( " Belgica Regia" , the " Royal Netherlands " ) .
The latter were ruled successively by the Spanish and the Austrian Habsburgs and comprised most of modern Belgium .
This was the theatre of most Franco-Spanish and Franco-Austrian wars during the 17th and 18th centuries .
Following the , the Low Countries—including territories that were never nominally under Habsburg rule , such as the Prince-Bishopric of Liège—were annexed by the French First Republic , ending Austrian rule in the region .
The reunification of the Low Countries as the United Kingdom of the Netherlands occurred at the dissolution of the First French Empire in 1815 , after the defeat of Napoleon .
In 1830 , the Belgian Revolution led to the separation of the Southern Provinces from the Netherlands and to the establishment of a Catholic and bourgeois , officially French-speaking and neutral , independent Belgium under a provisional government and a national congress .
Since the installation of Leopold I as king on 1831 ( which is now celebrated as Belgium 's National Day ) , Belgium has been a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary democracy , with a laicist constitution based on the Napoleonic code .
Although the franchise was initially restricted , universal suffrage for men was introduced after the general strike of 1893 ( with plural voting until 1919 ) and for women in 1949 .
The main political parties of the 19th century were the Catholic Party and the Liberal Party , with the Belgian Labour Party emerging towards the end of the 19th century .
French was originally the single official language adopted by the nobility and the bourgeoisie .
It progressively lost its overall importance as Dutch became recognised as well .
This recognition became official in 1898 and in 1967 a Dutch version of the Constitution was legally accepted .
The Berlin Conference of 1885 ceded control of the Congo Free State to King Leopold II as his private possession .
From around 1900 there was growing international concern for the extreme and savage treatment of the Congolese population under Leopold II , for whom the Congo was primarily a source of revenue from ivory and rubber production .
In 1908 this outcry led the Belgian state to assume responsibility for the government of the colony , henceforth called the Belgian Congo .
Germany invaded Belgium in 1914 as part of the Schlieffen Plan to attack France and much of the Western Front fighting of World War I occurred in western parts of the country .
The opening months of the war were known as the Rape of Belgium due to German excesses .
Belgium took over the German colonies of Ruanda-Urundi ( modern day Rwanda and Burundi ) during the war , and they were mandated to Belgium in 1924 by the League of Nations .
In the aftermath of the First World War , the Prussian districts of Eupen and Malmedy were annexed by Belgium in 1925 , thereby causing the presence of a German-speaking minority .
The country was again invaded by Germany in 1940 and was occupied until its liberation by the Allies in 1944 .
After World War II , a general strike forced King Leopold III , who many viewed as collaborating with Germany during the war , to abdicate in 1951 .
The Belgian Congo gained independence in 1960 during the Congo Crisis ;
Ruanda-Urundi followed with its independence two years later .
Belgium joined NATO as a founding member and formed the Benelux group of nations with the Netherlands and Luxembourg .
Belgium became one of the six founding members of the European Coal and Steel Community in 1951 and of the European Atomic Energy Community and European Economic Community , established in 1957.
The latter is now the European Union , for which Belgium hosts major administrations and institutions , including the European Commission , the Council of the European Union and the extraordinary and committee sessions of the European Parliament .
Belgium is a constitutional , popular monarchy and a federal parliamentary democracy .
The bicameral federal parliament is composed of a Senate and a Chamber of Representatives .
The former is made up of 40 directly elected politicians and 21 representatives appointed by the 3 Community parliaments , 10 co-opted senators and the children of the king , as Senators by Right who in practice do not cast their vote .
The Chamber 's 150 representatives are elected under a proportional voting system from 11 electoral districts .
Belgium has compulsory voting and thus holds one of the highest rates of voter turnout in the world .
The King ( currently Philippe ) is the head of state , though with limited prerogatives .
He appoints ministers , including a Prime Minister , that have the confidence of the Chamber of Representatives to form the federal government .
The Council of Ministers is composed of no more than fifteen members .
With the possible exception of the Prime Minister , the Council of Ministers is composed of an equal number of Dutch-speaking members and French-speaking members .
The judicial system is based on civil law and originates from the Napoleonic code .
The Court of Cassation is the court of last resort , with the Court of Appeal one level below .
Belgium 's political institutions are complex ; most political power is organised around the need to represent the main cultural communities .
Since around 1970 , the significant national Belgian political parties have split into distinct components that mainly represent the political and linguistic interests of these communities .
The major parties in each community , though close to the political centre , belong to three main groups : Christian Democrats , Liberals , and Social Democrats .
Further notable parties came into being well after the middle of last century , mainly around linguistic , nationalist , or environmental themes and recently smaller ones of some specific liberal nature .
A string of Christian Democrat coalition governments from 1958 was broken in 1999 after the first dioxin crisis , a major food contamination scandal .
A "rainbow coalition " emerged from six parties : the Flemish and the French-speaking Liberals , Social Democrats and Greens .
Later , a "purple coalition " of Liberals and Social Democrats formed after the Greens lost most of their seats in the 2003 election .
The government led by Prime Minister Guy Verhofstadt from 1999 to 2007 achieved a balanced budget , some tax reforms , a labour-market reform , scheduled nuclear phase-out and instigated legislation allowing more stringent war crime and more lenient soft drug usage prosecution .
Restrictions on withholding euthanasia were reduced and same-sex marriage legalized .
The government promoted active diplomacy in Africa and opposed the invasion of Iraq .
Verhofstadt 's coalition fared badly in the June 2007 elections .
For more than a year , the country experienced a political crisis .
This crisis was such that many observers speculated on a possible partition of Belgium .
From 2007 until 2008 the temporary Verhofstadt III Government was in office .
This coalition of the Flemish and Francophone Christian Democrats , the Flemish and Francophone Liberals together with the Francophone Social Democrats was an interim government until 2008 .
On that day a new government , led by Flemish Christian Democrat Yves Leterme , the actual winner of the federal elections of , was sworn in by the king .
On 2008 Leterme announced the resignation of the cabinet to the king , as no progress in constitutional reforms had been made .
In December 2008 he once more offered his resignation to the king after a crisis surrounding the sale of Fortis to BNP Paribas .
At this juncture , his resignation was accepted and Christian Democratic and Flemish Herman Van Rompuy was sworn in as Prime Minister on 2008 .
After Herman Van Rompuy was designated the first permanent President of the European Council on 2009 , he offered the resignation of his government to King Albert II on 2009 .
A few hours later , the new government under Prime Minister Yves Leterme was sworn in .
On 2010 , Leterme again offered the resignation of his cabinet to the king after one of the coalition partners , the OpenVLD , withdrew from the government , and on 2010 King Albert officially accepted the resignation .
The Parliamentary elections in Belgium on 2010 saw the Flemish nationalist N-VA become the largest party in Flanders , and the Socialist Party PS the largest party in Wallonia .
Until December 2011 , Belgium was governed by Leterme 's caretaker government awaiting the end of the deadlocked negotiations for formation of a new government .
By 30 March 2011 this set a new world record for the elapsed time without an official government , previously held by war-torn Iraq .
Finally , in December 2011 the current government led by Walloon socialist Prime Minister Elio Di Rupo was sworn in .
Following a usage which can be traced back to the Burgundian and Habsburgian courts , in the 19th century it was necessary to speak French to belong to the governing upper class , and those who could only speak Dutch were effectively second-class citizens .
Late that century , and continuing into the 20th century , Flemish movements evolved to counter this situation .
While the people in Southern Belgium spoke French or dialects of French , and most Brusselers adopted French as their first language , the Flemings refused to do so and succeeded progressively in making Dutch an equal language in the education system .
Following World War II , Belgian politics became increasingly dominated by the autonomy of its two main linguistic communities .
Intercommunal tensions rose and the constitution was amended to minimise the potential for conflict .
Based on the four language areas defined in 1962–63 ( the Dutch , bilingual , French and German language areas ) , consecutive revisions of the country 's constitution in 1970 , 1980 , 1988 and 1993 established a unique form of a federal state with segregated political power into three levels :
The constitutional language areas determine the official languages in their municipalities , as well as the geographical limits of the empowered institutions for specific matters .
Although this would allow for seven parliaments and governments , when the Communities and Regions were created in 1980 , Flemish politicians decided to merge both .
Thus the Flemings just have one single institutional body of parliament and government is empowered for all except federal and specific municipal matters .
The overlapping boundaries of the Regions and Communities have created two notable peculiarities : the territory of the Brussels-Capital Region ( which came into existence nearly a decade after the other regions ) is included in both the Flemish and French Communities , and the territory of the German-speaking Community lies wholly within the Walloon Region .
Conflicts about jurisdiction between the bodies are resolved by the Constitutional Court of Belgium .
The structure is intended as a compromise to allow different cultures to live together peacefully .
The Federal State 's authority includes justice , defence , federal police , social security , nuclear energy , monetary policy and public debt , and other aspects of public finances .
State-owned companies include the Belgian Post Group and Belgian Railways .
The Federal Government is responsible for the obligations of Belgium and its federalized institutions towards the European Union and NATO .
It controls substantial parts of public health , home affairs and foreign affairs .
The budget—without the debt—controlled by the federal government amounts to about 50 % of the national fiscal income .
The federal government employs around 12 % of the civil servants .
Communities exercise their authority only within linguistically determined geographical boundaries , originally oriented towards the individuals of a Community 's language : culture ( including audiovisual media ) , education and the use of the relevant language .
Extensions to personal matters less directly connected with language comprise health policy ( curative and preventive medicine ) and assistance to individuals ( protection of youth , social welfare , aid to families , immigrant assistance services , and so on . ) .
Regions have authority in fields that can be broadly associated with their territory .
These include economy , employment , agriculture , water policy , housing , public works , energy , transport , the environment , town and country planning , nature conservation , credit and foreign trade .
They supervise the provinces , municipalities and intercommunal utility companies .
In several fields , the different levels each have their own say on specifics .
With education , for instance , the autonomy of the Communities neither includes decisions about the compulsory aspect nor allows for setting minimum requirements for awarding qualifications , which remain federal matters .
Each level of government can be involved in scientific research and international relations associated with its powers .
The treaty-making power of the Regions ' and Communities ' Governments is the broadest of all the Federating units of all the Federations all over the world .
Belgium shares borders with France ( ) , Germany ( ) , Luxembourg ( ) and the Netherlands ( ) .
Its total area , including surface water area , is 30,528 square kilometres ; land area alone is 30,278 km2 .
It lies between latitudes 49°30 and 51°30 N , and longitudes 2°33 and 6°24 E.
Belgium has three main geographical regions : the coastal plain in the north-west and the central plateau both belong to the Anglo-Belgian Basin ; the Ardennes uplands in the south-east are part of the Hercynian orogenic belt .
The Paris Basin reaches a small fourth area at Belgium 's southernmost tip , Belgian Lorraine .
The coastal plain consists mainly of sand dunes and polders .
Further inland lies a smooth , slowly rising landscape irrigated by numerous waterways , with fertile valleys and the northeastern sandy plain of the Campine ( " Kempen " ) .
The thickly forested hills and plateaux of the Ardennes are more rugged and rocky with caves and small gorges .
Extending westward into France , this area is eastwardly connected to the Eifel in Germany by the High Fens plateau , on which the Signal de Botrange forms the country 's highest point at .
The climate is maritime temperate with significant precipitation in all seasons ( Köppen climate classification : " Cfb" ) , like most of northwest Europe .
The average temperature is lowest in January at and highest in July at .
The average precipitation per month varies between for February or April , to for July .
Averages for the years 2000 to 2006 show daily temperature minimums of and maximums of and monthly rainfall of ; these are about 1 °C and nearly 10 millimetres above last century 's normal values , respectively .
Phytogeographically , Belgium is shared between the Atlantic European and Central European provinces of the Circumboreal Region within the Boreal Kingdom .
According to the World Wide Fund for Nature , the territory of Belgium belongs to the ecoregion of Atlantic mixed forests .
Because of its high population density , its location in the centre of Western Europe and inadequate political effort , Belgium faces serious environmental problems .
( rivers and groundwater ) to have the lowest water quality of the 122 countries studied .
In the 2006 pilot Environmental Performance Index , Belgium scored 75.9 % for overall environmental performance and was ranked lowest of the EU member countries , though it was only 39th of 133 countries .
The territory of Belgium is divided into three Regions , two of which , Flanders and Wallonia , are in turn subdivided into provinces ; the third Region , Brussels , is neither a province nor a part of a province .
Belgium 's strongly globalized economy and its transport infrastructure are integrated with the rest of Europe .
Its location at the heart of a highly industrialized region helped make it the world 's 15th largest trading nation in 2007 .
The economy is characterized by a highly productive work force , high GNP and high exports per capita .
Belgium 's main imports are raw materials , machinery and equipment , chemicals , raw diamonds , pharmaceuticals , foodstuffs , transportation equipment , and oil products .
Its main exports are machinery and equipment , chemicals , finished diamonds , metals and metal products , and foodstuffs .
The Belgian economy is heavily service-oriented and shows a dual nature : a dynamic Flemish economy and a Walloon economy that lags behind .
One of the founding members of the European Union , Belgium strongly supports an open economy and the extension of the powers of EU institutions to integrate member economies .
Since 1922 , through the Belgium-Luxembourg Economic Union , Belgium and Luxembourg have been a single trade market with customs and currency union .
Belgium was the first continental European country to undergo the Industrial Revolution , in the early 19th century .
Liège and Charleroi rapidly developed mining and steelmaking , which flourished until the mid-20th century in the Sambre and Meuse valley and made Belgium among one of the three most industrialized nations in the world from 1830 to 1910 .
However , by the 1840s the textile industry of Flanders was in severe crisis , and the region experienced famine from 1846 to 1850 .
After World War II , Ghent and Antwerp experienced a rapid expansion of the chemical and petroleum industries .
The 1973 and 1979 oil crises sent the economy into a recession ; it was particularly prolonged in Wallonia , where the steel industry had become less competitive and experienced serious decline .
In the 1980s and 1990s , the economic centre of the country continued to shift northwards and is now concentrated in the populous Flemish Diamond area .
By the end of the 1980s , Belgian macroeconomic policies had resulted in a cumulative government debt of about 120 % of GDP.
As of 2006 , the budget was balanced and public debt was equal to 90.30 % of GDP.
In 2005 and 2006 , real GDP growth rates of 1.5 % and 3.0 % , respectively , were slightly above the average for the Euro area .
Unemployment rates of 8.4 % in 2005 and 8.2 % in 2006 were close to the area average .
By , this had grown to 8.5 % compared to an average rate of 9.6 % for the European Union as a whole ( EU 27 ) .
From 1832 until 2002 , Belgium 's currency was the Belgian franc.
Belgium switched to the euro in 2002 , with the first sets of euro coins being minted in 1999 .
The standard Belgian euro coins designated for circulation show the portrait of King Albert II .
Despite an 18 % decrease observed from 1970 to 1999 , Belgium still had in 1999 the highest rail network density within the European Union with 113.8 km/1 000 km2 .
On the other hand , the same period of time , 1970–1999 , has seen a huge growth ( +56 % ) of the motorway network .
In 1999 , the density of km motorways per 1000 km2 and 1000 inhabitants amounted to 55.1 and 16.5 respectively and were significantly superior to the EU 's means of 13.7 and 15.9 .
Belgium experiences some of the most congested traffic in Europe .
In 2010 , commuters to the cities of Brussels and Antwerp spent respectively 65 and 64 hours a year in traffic jams .
Like in most small European countries , more than 80 % of the airways traffic is handled by a single airport , the Brussels Airport .
The ports of Antwerp and Zeebrugge share more than 80 % of Belgian maritime traffic , Antwerp being the second European harbour with a gross weight of goods handled of 115 988 000 t in 2000 after a growth of 10.9 % over the preceding five years .
The Belgian Armed Forces have about 47,000 active troops .
In 2010 , Belgium 's defence budget totaled €3.95 billion ( representing 1.12 % of its GDP ) .
They are organised into one unified structure which consists of four main components : Land Component , or the Army ; Air Component , or the Air Force ; Naval Component , or the Navy ; Medical Component .
The operational commands of the four components are subordinate to the Staff Department for Operations and Training of the Ministry of Defence , which is headed by the Assistant Chief of Staff Operations and Training , and to the Chief of Defence .
The effects of World War II made collective security a priority for Belgian foreign policy .
In March 1948 Belgium signed the Treaty of Brussels , and then joined NATO in 1948 .
However the integration of the armed forces into NATO did not begin until after the Korean War .
The Belgians , along with the Luxembourg government , sent a detachment of battalion strength to fight in Korea known as the Belgian United Nations Command .
This mission was the first in a long line of UN missions which the Belgians supported .
Contributions to the development of science and technology have appeared throughout the country 's history .
The 16th century Early Modern flourishing of Western Europe included cartographer Gerardus Mercator , anatomist Andreas Vesalius , herbalist Rembert Dodoens and mathematician Simon Stevin among the most influential scientists .
Chemist Ernest Solvay and engineer Zenobe Gramme (École Industrielle de Liège ) gave their names to the Solvay process and the Gramme dynamo , respectively , in the 1860s .
Bakelite was developed in 1907–1909 by Leo Baekeland .
Ernest Solvay also acted as a major philanthropist and gave its name to the Solvay Institute of Sociology , the Solvay Brussels School of Economics and Management and the International Solvay Institutes for Physics and Chemistry which are now part of the Université Libre de Bruxelles .
In 1911 , he started a series of conferences , the Solvay Conferences on Physics and Chemistry , which have had a deep impact on the evolution of quantum physics and chemistry .
A major contribution to fundamental science was also due to a Belgian , Monsignor Georges Lemaître ( Catholic University of Leuven ) , who is credited with proposing the Big Bang theory of the origin of the universe in 1927 .
Three Nobel Prizes in Physiology or Medicine were awarded to Belgians : Jules Bordet ( Université Libre de Bruxelles ) in 1919 , Corneille Heymans ( University of Ghent ) in 1938 and Albert Claude ( Université Libre de Bruxelles ) together with Christian De Duve ( Université Catholique de Louvain ) in 1974 .
François Englert ( Université Libre de Bruxelles ) was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 2013 .
Ilya Prigogine ( Université Libre de Bruxelles ) was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1977 .
Two Belgian mathematicians have been awarded the Fields Medal : Pierre Deligne in 1978 and Jean Bourgain in 1994 .
Almost all of the Belgian population is urban—97 % in 2004 .
The population density of Belgium is 365 per square kilometre ( 952 per square mile ) as of March 2013 .
As of 2012 , the Flemish Region had a population of 6,350,765 , with Antwerp ( 502,604 ) , Ghent ( 248,242 ) and Bruges ( 117,170 ) , its most populous cities . Wallonia had 3,546,329 with Charleroi ( 203,871 ) , Liège ( 195,576 ) and Namur ( 110,096 ) , its most populous cities . Brussels has 1,138,854 inhabitants in the Capital Region 's 19 municipalities , three of which have over 100,000 residents .
As of 2007 , nearly 92 % of the population had Belgian citizenship , and other European Union member citizens account for around 6 % .
The prevalent foreign nationals were Italian ( 171,918 ) , French ( 125,061 ) , Dutch ( 116,970 ) , Moroccan ( 80,579 ) , Portuguese ( 43,509 ) , Spanish ( 42,765 ) , Turkish ( 39,419 ) and German ( 37,621 ) .
In 2007 , there were 1.38 million foreign-born residents in Belgium , corresponding to 12.9 % of the total population .
Of these , 685,000 ( 6.4 % ) were born outside the EU and 695,000 ( 6.5 % ) were born in another EU Member State .
At the beginning of 2012 , people of foreign background and their descendants were estimated to have formed around 25 % of the total population i .e . 2.8 million "new Belgians " .
Of these new Belgians , 1,200,000 are of European ancestry and 1,350,000 are from non-Western countries ( most of them from Morocco , Turkey , Algeria , and the DR Congo ) .
Since the modification of the Belgian nationality law in 1984 more than 1.3 million migrants have acquired Belgian citizenship .
The largest group of immigrants and their descendants in Belgium are Moroccans , with more than 450,000 people .
The Turks are the third largest group , and the second largest Muslim ethnic group , numbering 220,000 .
89.2 % of inhabitants of Turkish origin have been naturalized , as have 88.4 % of people of Moroccan background , 75.4 % of Italians , 56.2 % of the French and 47.8 % of Dutch people .
Belgium has three official languages , which are ( in order of size of the native speaking population of Belgium ) Dutch , French and German .
A number of non-official minority languages are spoken as well .
As no census exists , there are no official statistical data regarding the distribution or usage of Belgium 's three official languages or their dialects .
However , various criteria , including the language( s ) of parents , of education , or the second-language status of foreign born , may provide suggested figures .
An estimated 60 % of the Belgian population speaks Dutch ( often referred to as Flemish ) , and 40 % of the population speaks French .
( French-speaking Belgians are often referred to as Walloons , although the French speakers in Brussels are not Walloons ) .
Total Dutch speakers are 6.23 million , concentrated in the northern Flanders region , while French speakers comprise 3.32 million in Wallonia and an estimated 870,000 ( or 85 % ) in the officially bilingual Brussels-Capital Region .
The German-speaking Community is made up of 73,000 people in the east of the Walloon Region ; around 10,000 German and 60,000 Belgian nationals are speakers of German .
Roughly 23,000 more German speakers live in municipalities near the official Community .
Both Belgian Dutch and Belgian French have minor differences in vocabulary and semantic nuances from the varieties spoken respectively in the Netherlands and France .
Many Flemish people still speak dialects of Dutch in their local environment .
Walloon , once the main regional language of Wallonia , is now only understood and spoken occasionally , mostly by elderly people .
Wallonia 's dialects , along with those of Picard , are not used in public life and have been replaced by French .
Education is compulsory from 6 to 18 years of age for Belgians .
Among OECD countries in 2002 , Belgium had the third highest proportion of 18- to 21-year-olds enrolled in postsecondary education , at 42 % .
Though an estimated 99 % of the adult population is literate , concern is rising over functional illiteracy .
The Programme for International Student Assessment ( PISA ) , coordinated by the OECD , currently ranks Belgium 's education as the 19th best in the world , being significantly higher than the OECD average .
Education being organised separately by each , the Flemish Community scores noticeably above the French and German-speaking Communities .
Mirroring the dual structure of the 19th-century Belgian political landscape , characterized by the Liberal and the Catholic parties , the educational system is segregated within a secular and a religious segment .
The secular branch of schooling is controlled by the communities , the provinces , or the municipalities , while religious , mainly Catholic branch education , is organised by religious authorities , although subsidized and supervised by the communities .
Since the country 's independence , Roman Catholicism , counterbalanced by strong freethought movements , has had an important role in Belgium 's politics .
However Belgium is largely a secular country as the "laicist " constitution provides for freedom of religion , and the government generally respects this right in practice .
During the reigns of Albert I and Baudouin , the monarchy had a reputation of deeply rooted Catholicism .
Roman Catholicism has traditionally been Belgium 's majority religion ; being especially strong in Flanders .
However , by 2009 Sunday church attendance was 5 % for Belgium in total ; 3 % in Brussels , and 5.4 % in Flanders .
Church attendance in 2009 in Belgium was roughly half of the Sunday church attendance in 1998 ( 11 % for the total of Belgium in 1998 ) .
Despite the drop in church attendance , Catholic identity nevertheless remains an important part of Belgium 's culture .
Symbolically and materially , the Roman Catholic Church remains in a favourable position .
Belgium has three officially recognized religions : Christianity ( Catholic , Protestantism , Orthodoxy and Anglicanism ) , Islam and Judaism .
In the early 2000s there were approximately 42,000 Jews in Belgium .
The Jewish Community of Antwerp ( numbering some 18,000 ) is one of the largest in Europe , and one of the last places in the world where Yiddish is the primary language of a large Jewish community ( mirroring certain Orthodox and Hassidic communities in New York and Israel ) .
In addition most Jewish children in Antwerp receive a Jewish education .
There are several Jewish newspapers and more than 45 active synagogues ( 30 of which are in Antwerp ) in the country .
A 2006 inquiry in Flanders , considered to be a more religious region than Wallonia , showed that 55 % considered themselves religious and that 36 % believed that God created the universe .
On the other hand , Wallonia has become one of Europe 's most secular/least religious regions .
Most of the French-speaking region 's population does not consider religion an important part of their lives , and as much as 45 % of the population identifies as irreligious .
This is particularly the case in eastern Wallonia and areas along the French border .
A 2008 estimate found that 6 % of the Belgian population , about 628,751 , is Muslim (98 % Sunni) , while a 2011 estimate claims 1,000,000 inhabitants of Muslim background in the country .
Muslims constitute 30–35 % of the population of Brussels , 4.0 % of Wallonia and 3.9 % of Flanders .
The majority of Belgian Muslims live in the major cities , such as Antwerp , Brussels and Charleroi .
The largest group of immigrants in Belgium are Moroccans , with 400,000 people .
The Turks are the third largest group , and the second largest Muslim ethnic group , numbering 220,000 .
According to the Eurobarometer Poll in 2010 , 37 % of Belgian citizens responded that " they believe there is a God" , whereas 31 % answered that " they believe there is some sort of spirit or life force " and 27 % that " they do not believe there is any sort of spirit , God , or life force " .
The Belgians are known to enjoy good health .
According to 2012 estimates , the average life expectancy is 79.65 years .
Since 1960 , life expectancy has , in line with the European average , grown by two months per year .
Death in Belgium is mainly due to heart and vascular disorders , neoplasms , disorders of the respiratory system and unnatural causes of death ( accidents , suicide ) .
Non-natural causes of death and cancer are the most common causes of death for females up to age 24 and males up to age 44 .
Healthcare in Belgium is financed through both social security contributions and taxation .
Health care is delivered by a mostly private system of independent medical practitioners and hospitals .
Most of the time each provided service is directly paid by the patient and reimbursed later on by health insurance companies .
Belgian health care system is supervised and financed by the federal government , the three Communities and the three Regions , i .e . six distinct Ministries ( the Flemish Community and Region have merged ) .
Despite its political and linguistic divisions , the region corresponding to today 's Belgium has seen the flourishing of major artistic movements that have had tremendous influence on European art and culture .
Nowadays , to a certain extent , cultural life is concentrated within each language Community , and a variety of barriers have made a shared cultural sphere less pronounced .
Since the 1970s , there are no bilingual universities or colleges in the country except the Royal Military Academy and the Antwerp Maritime Academy , no common media and no single large cultural or scientific organisation in which both main communities are represented .
Contributions to painting and architecture have been especially rich .
The Mosan art , the Early Netherlandish , the Flemish Renaissance and Baroque painting and major examples of Romanesque , Gothic , Renaissance and Baroque architecture are milestones in the history of art .
While the 15th century 's art in the Low Countries is dominated by the religious paintings of Jan van Eyck and Rogier van der Weyden , the 16th century is characterized by a broader panel of styles such as Peter Breughel 's landscape paintings and Lambert Lombard 's representation of the antique .
Though the Baroque style of Peter Paul Rubens and Anthony van Dyck flourished in the early 17th century in the Southern Netherlands , it gradually declined thereafter .
During the 19th and 20th centuries many original romantic , expressionist and surrealist Belgian painters emerged , including James Ensor and other artists belonging to the Les XX group , Constant Permeke , Paul Delvaux and René Magritte .
The avant-garde CoBrA movement appeared in the 1950s , while the sculptor Panamarenko remains a remarkable figure in contemporary art .
The multidisciplinary artist Jan Fabre and the painter Luc Tuymans are other internationally renowned figures on the contemporary art scene .
Belgian contributions to architecture also continued into the 19th and 20th centuries , including the work of Victor Horta and Henry van de Velde , who were major initiators of the Art Nouveau style .
The vocal music of the Franco-Flemish School developed in the southern part of the Low Countries and was an important contribution to Renaissance culture .
In the 19th and 20th centuries , there was an emergence of major violinists , such as Henri Vieuxtemps , Eugène Ysaÿe and Arthur Grumiaux , while Adolphe Sax invented the saxophone in 1846 .
The composer César Franck was born in Liège in 1822 .
Contemporary music in Belgium is also of repute .
Jazz musician Toots Thielemans and singer Jacques Brel have achieved global fame .
In rock/pop music , Telex , Front 242 , K 's Choice , Hooverphonic , Zap Mama , Soulwax and dEUS are well known .
In the heavy metal scene , bands like Machiavel , Channel Zero and Enthroned have a worldwide fan-base .</ref>
Belgium has produced several well-known authors , including the poet Emile Verhaeren and novelists Hendrik Conscience , Georges Simenon , Suzanne Lilar , Hugo Claus , and Amélie Nothomb .
The poet and playwright Maurice Maeterlinck won the Nobel Prize in literature in 1911 .
" The Adventures of Tintin " by Hergé is the best known of Franco-Belgian comics , but many other major authors , including Peyo ( " The Smurfs " ) , André Franquin ( " Gaston Lagaffe " ) , Edgar P. Jacobs and Willy Vandersteen brought the Belgian cartoon strip industry a worldwide fame .
Belgian cinema has brought a number of mainly Flemish novels to life on-screen .
Other Belgian directors include André Delvaux , Stijn Coninx , Luc and Jean-Pierre Dardenne ; well-known actors include Jean-Claude Van Damme , Jan Decleir and Marie Gillain ; and successful films include " Bullhead , Man Bites Dog " and " The Alzheimer Affair" .
In the 1980s , Antwerp 's Royal Academy of Fine Arts produced important fashion trendsetters , known as the Antwerp Six .
Folklore plays a major role in Belgium 's cultural life : the country has a comparatively high number of processions , cavalcades , parades , 'ommegangs ' and 'ducasses' , 'kermesse ' and other local festivals , nearly always with an originally religious or mythological background .
The Carnival of Binche with its famous Gilles and the 'Processional Giants and Dragons ' of Ath , Brussels , Dendermonde , Mechelen and Mons are recognised by UNESCO as Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity .
Other examples are the Carnival of Aalst ; the still very religious processions of the Holy Blood in Bruges , Virga Jesse Basilica in Hasselt and Basilica of Our Lady of Hanswijk in Mechelen ; festival in Liège ; and the Walloon festival in Namur .
Originated in 1832 and revived in the 1960s , the Gentse Feesten have become a modern tradition .
A major non-official holiday is the Saint Nicholas Day , a festivity for children and , in Liège , for students .
Many highly ranked Belgian restaurants can be found in the most influential restaurant guides , such as the Michelin Guide .
Belgium is famous for beer , chocolate , waffles and french fries with mayonnaise .
Contrary to their name , french fries are claimed to have originated in Belgium , although their exact place of origin is uncertain .
The national dishes are " steak and fries with salad" , and "mussels with fries " .
Brands of Belgian chocolate and pralines , like Côte d'Or , Neuhaus , Leonidas and Godiva are famous , as well as independent producers such as Burie and Del Rey in Antwerp and Mary 's in Brussels .
The Trappist beer of the Abbey of Westvleteren has repeatedly been rated the world 's best beer .
The biggest brewer in the world by volume is Anheuser-Busch InBev , based in Leuven .
Since the 1970s , sports clubs and federations are organised separately within each language community .
Association football is one of the most popular sports in both parts of Belgium , together with cycling , tennis , swimming and judo .
Belgians hold the most Tour de France victories of any country except France .
They have also the most victories on the UCI Road World Championships .
Another modern well-known Belgian cyclist is Tom Boonen .
With five victories in the Tour de France and numerous other cycling records , Belgian cyclist Eddy Merckx is regarded as one of the greatest cyclists of all time .
Jean-Marie Pfaff , a former Belgian goalkeeper , is considered one of the greatest in the history of football ( soccer ) .
Belgium and The Netherlands previously hosted the UEFA European Football Championship in 2000 .
The current Belgium football team have qualified for the 2014 world cup in Brazil and have a range of Premier League footbal players such as Adnan Januzaj , Romelu Lukaku , Eden Hazard , Vincent Kompany and Marouane Fellaini .
Kim Clijsters and Justine Henin both were Player of the Year in the Women 's Tennis Association as they were ranked the number one female tennis player .
The Spa-Francorchamps motor-racing circuit hosts the Formula One World Championship Belgian Grand Prix .
The Belgian driver , Jacky Ickx , won eight Grands Prix and six 24 Hours of Le Mans and finished twice as runner-up in the Formula One World Championship .
Belgium also has a strong reputation in motocross .
Sporting events annually held in Belgium include the Memorial Van Damme athletics competition , the Belgian Grand Prix Formula One , and a number of classic cycle races such as the Tour of Flanders and Liège–Bastogne–Liège .
The 1920 Summer Olympics were held in Antwerp .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Bluegrass refers to several species of grasses of the genus " Poa" ( with the most famous being the Kentucky bluegrass )
The term has also been applied to various things that relate to the region in which the grass grows :
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
The Symphony No. 9 in D minor , Op . 125 ( sometimes known simply as " the Choral" ) , is the final complete symphony of Ludwig van Beethoven ( 1770–1827 ) .
Completed in 1824 , the symphony is one of the best-known works of the repertoire of classical music .
Among critics , it is almost universally considered to be among Beethoven 's greatest works , and is considered by some to be the greatest piece of music ever written .
The symphony was the first example of a major composer using voices in a symphony ( thus making it a choral symphony ) .
The words are sung during the final movement by four vocal soloists and a chorus .
They were taken from the " Ode to Joy" , a poem written by Friedrich Schiller in 1785 and revised in 1803 , with additions made by the composer .
Today , it stands as one of the most played symphonies in the world .
In 2001 , Beethoven 's autograph score of the Ninth Symphony , held by the Berlin State Library , was added to the United Nations World Heritage List , becoming the first musical score to be so honoured .
The Philharmonic Society of London originally commissioned the symphony in 1817 .
The main composition work was done between autumn 1822 and the completion of the autograph in February 1824 .
The symphony emerged from other pieces by Beethoven that , while completed works in their own right , are also in some sense sketches for the future symphony .
80 ( 1808 ) , basically a piano concerto movement , brings in a chorus and vocal soloists near the end to form the climax .
As in the Ninth Symphony , the vocal forces sing a theme first played instrumentally , and this theme is highly reminiscent of the corresponding theme in the Ninth Symphony ( for a detailed comparison , see Choral Fantasy ) .
Going further back , an earlier version of the Choral Fantasy theme is found in the song " Gegenliebe " ( " Returned Love " ) , for piano and high voice , which dates from before 1795 .
According to Robert W. Gutman , Mozart 's K. 222 Offertory in D minor , " Misericordias Domini" , written in 1775 , contains a melody that foreshadows " Ode to Joy" .
Although his major works had primarily been premiered in Vienna , Beethoven was eager to have his latest composition performed in Berlin as soon as possible after finishing it , since he thought that musical taste in Vienna had become dominated by Italian composers such as Rossini .
When his friends and financiers heard this , they urged him to premiere the symphony in Vienna in the form of a petition signed by a number of prominent Viennese music patrons and performers .
Beethoven was flattered by the adoration of Vienna , so the Ninth Symphony was premiered on 7 May 1824 in the Theater am Kärntnertor in Vienna , along with the overture " The Consecration of the House " ( ) and three parts of the " Missa solemnis " ( the Kyrie , Credo , and the Agnus Dei ) .
This was the composer 's first on-stage appearance in 12 years ; the hall was packed with an eager audience and a number of musicians .
The premiere of Symphony No. 9 involved the largest orchestra ever assembled by Beethoven and required the combined efforts of the Kärntnertor house orchestra , The Vienna Music Society ( Gesellschaft der Musikfreunde ) , along with a select group of capable amateurs .
While no complete list of premiere performers exists , many of Vienna 's most elite performers are known to have participated .
The soprano and alto parts were interpreted by two famous young singers : Henriette Sontag and Caroline Unger .
German soprano Henriette Sontag ( 1806–1854 ) was eighteen years old when Beethoven personally recruited her to perform in the premiere of the Ninth Symphony .
Also personally recruited by Beethoven , 21 year old contralto Caroline Unger ( 1803–1877 ) , a native of Vienna , had gained critical praise in 1821 appearing in Rossini 's " Tancredi" .
After performing in Beethoven 's 1824 premiere , Unger found fame in Italy and Paris .
Italian composers Donizetti and Bellini were known to have written roles specifically for her voice .
Although the performance was officially directed by Michael Umlauf , the theatre 's Kapellmeister , Beethoven shared the stage with him .
However , two years earlier , Umlauf had watched as the composer 's attempt to conduct a dress rehearsal of his opera " Fidelio" ended in disaster .
So this time , he instructed the singers and musicians to ignore the almost totally deaf Beethoven .
At the beginning of every part , Beethoven , who sat by the stage , gave the tempos .
He was turning the pages of his score and beating time for an orchestra he could not hear .
There are a number of anecdotes about the premiere of the Ninth .
Based on the testimony of the participants , there are suggestions that it was under-rehearsed ( there were only two full rehearsals ) and rather scrappy in execution .
On the other hand , the premiere was a great success .
In any case , Beethoven was not to blame , as violinist Joseph Böhm recalled : " Beethoven directed the piece himself ; that is , he stood before the lectern and gesticulated furiously .
At times he rose , at other times he shrank to the ground , he moved as if he wanted to play all the instruments himself and sing for the whole chorus .
All the musicians minded his rhythm alone while playing" .
When the audience applauded—testimonies differ over whether at the end of the scherzo or the whole symphony—Beethoven was several measures off and still conducting .
Because of that , the contralto Caroline Unger walked over and turned Beethoven around to accept the audience 's cheers and applause .
According to one witness , " the public received the musical hero with the utmost respect and sympathy , listened to his wonderful , gigantic creations with the most absorbed attention and broke out in jubilant applause , often during sections , and repeatedly at the end of them . "
The whole audience acclaimed him through standing ovations five times ; there were handkerchiefs in the air , hats , raised hands , so that Beethoven , who could not hear the applause , could at least see the ovation gestures .
The first German edition was printed by B. Schott 's Söhne ( Mainz ) in 1826 .
The Breitkopf & Härtel edition dating from 1864 has been used widely by orchestras .
In 1997 Bärenreiter published an edition by Jonathan Del Mar .
According to Del Mar , this edition corrects nearly 3000 mistakes in the Breitkopf edition , some of which were "remarkable " .
David Levy , however , criticized this edition , saying that it could create "quite possibly false " traditions .
Breitkopf also published a new edition by Peter Hauschild in 2005 .
While many of the modifications in the newer editions make minor alterations to dynamics and articulation , both editions change the orchestral lead-in to the final statement of the choral theme in the fourth movement ( IV : m525 m542 ) .
The newer versions alter the articulation of the horn calls , creating syncopation that no longer relates to the previous motive .
The new Breitkopf & Härtel and Bärenreiter make this alteration differently , but the result is a reading that is different from what was commonly accepted based on the 1864 Breitkopf edition .
While both Breitkopf & Härtel and Bärenreiter consider their editions the most accurate versions available—labeling them Urtext editions—their conclusions are not universally accepted .
In his monograph " Beethoven—the ninth symphony" , David Levy describes the rationale for these changes and the danger of calling the editions Urtext .
The symphony is scored for the following orchestra .
These are by far the largest forces needed for any Beethoven symphony ; at the premiere , Beethoven augmented them further by assigning two players to each wind part .
The symphony is in four movements , marked as follows :
Beethoven changes the usual pattern of Classical symphonies in placing the scherzo movement before the slow movement ( in symphonies , slow movements are usually placed before scherzi ) .
This was the first time that he did this in a symphony , although he had done so in some previous works ( including the quartets Op . 18 no .
5 , the " Archduke " piano trio Op . 97 , the " Hammerklavier " piano sonata Op . 106 ) .
Haydn , too , had used this arrangement in a number of his own works such as the String Quartet No. 30 in E-flat major .
The first movement is in sonata form , and the mood is often stormy .
The opening theme , played "pianissimo " over string tremolos , so much resembles the sound of an orchestra tuning , many commentators have suggested that was Beethoven 's inspiration .
But from within that musical limbo emerges a theme of power and clarity which will drive the entire movement .
Later , at the outset of the recapitulation section , it returns "fortissimo " in D major , rather than the opening 's D minor .
The introduction also employs the use of the mediant to tonic relationship which further distorts the tonic key until it is finally played by the bassoon in the lowest possible register .
The second movement , a scherzo and trio , is also in D minor , with the introduction bearing a passing resemblance to the opening theme of the first movement , a pattern also found in the Hammerklavier piano sonata , written a few years earlier .
At times during the piece , Beethoven directs that the beat should be one downbeat every three bars , perhaps because of the very fast pace of the movement , with the direction "ritmo di tre battute " ( "rhythm of three bars " ) , and one beat every four bars with the direction "ritmo di quattro battute " ( "rhythm of four bars " ) .
Beethoven had been criticised before for failing to adhere to standard form for his compositions .
He used this movement to answer his critics .
Beethoven wrote this piece in triple time , but it is punctuated in a way that , when coupled with the speed of the metre , makes it sound as though it is in quadruple time .
While adhering to the standard ternary design of a dance movement (scherzo-trio-scherzo , or minuet-trio-minuet ) , the scherzo section has an elaborate internal structure ; it is a complete sonata form .
Within this sonata form , the first group of the exposition starts out with a fugue before modulating to C major for the second part of the exposition .
The exposition is then repeated before a short development section .
The recapitulation further develops the exposition , also containing timpani solos .
A new development section is played before the recapitulation is repeated , and the scherzo concludes with a brief codetta .
The contrasting trio section is in D major and in duple time .
The trio is the first time the trombones play in the movement .
Following the trio , the second occurrence of the scherzo , unlike the first , plays through without any repetition , after which there is a brief reprise of the trio , and the movement ends with an abrupt coda .
Adagio molto e cantabile – Andante Moderato – Tempo Primo – Andante Moderato – Adagio – Lo Stesso Tempo .
The lyrical slow movement , in B-flat major , is in a loose variation form , with each pair of variations progressively elaborating the rhythm and melody .
The first variation , like the theme , is in 4/4 time , the second in 12/8 .
The variations are separated by passages in 3/4 , the first in D major , the second in G major .
The final variation is twice interrupted by episodes in which loud fanfares for the full orchestra are answered by octaves played by the first violins alone .
A prominent horn solo is assigned to the fourth player .
Presto ; Allegro molto assai ( Alla marcia ) ; Andante maestoso ; Allegro energico , sempre ben marcato .
The famous choral finale is Beethoven 's musical representation of Universal Brotherhood .
American pianist and music author Charles Rosen has characterized it as a symphony within a symphony , played without interruption .
This "inner symphony " follows the same overall pattern as the Ninth Symphony as a whole .
The movement has a thematic unity , in which every part may be shown to be based on either the main theme , the " Seid umschlungen " theme , or some combination of the two .
The first "movement within a movement " itself is organized into sections :
The text is largely taken from Schiller 's " Ode to Joy" , with a few additional introductory words written specifically by Beethoven ( shown in italics ) .
The text without repeats is shown below , with a translation into English .
For the full libretto including all repetitions see German Wikisource .
Towards the end of the movement , the choir sings the last four lines of the main theme , concluding with " " Alle Menschen " " , before the soloists sing for one last time the song of joy at a slower tempo .
The chorus repeats parts of " " Seid umschlungen , Millionen !
And finally , " " Freude , schöner Götterfunken , Götterfunken ! " " . with the orchestra playing prestissimo .
Among music critics , the Ninth Symphony is almost universally considered to be among Beethoven 's greatest works , and is considered by some to be the greatest piece of music ever written .
" Yet early critics rejected it as cryptic and eccentric , the product of a deaf and aging composer . "
The finale of the Ninth has had detractors .
Giuseppe Verdi complained about the vocal writing ; in a letter he wrote to Clarina Maffei dated 20 April 1878 , he stated that the symphony was :
...marvelous in its first three movements , very badly set in the last .
No one will ever surpass the sublimity of the first movement , but it will be an easy task to write as badly for voices as is done in the last movement .
Gustav Leonhardt objected to the text itself , saying : " That 'Ode to Joy ' , talk about vulgarity !
Conductors in the historically informed performance movement , notably Roger Norrington , have used Beethoven 's suggested tempos , to mixed reviews .
Benjamin Zander has made a case for following Beethoven 's metronome markings , both in writing and in performances with the Boston Philharmonic Orchestra and Philharmonia Orchestra of London .
Beethoven 's metronome still exists , and it has been tested and found to be accurate .
A number of conductors have made alterations in the instrumentation of the symphony , notably Richard Wagner , who doubled many woodwind passages , a modification greatly extended by Gustav Mahler , who revised the orchestration of the Ninth to make it sound like what he believed Beethoven would have wanted if given a modern orchestra .
Wagner 's Dresden performance of 1864 was the first to place the chorus and the solo singers behind the orchestra as has since become standard ; previous conductors placed them between the orchestra and the audience .
Beethoven 's writing for horns and trumpets throughout the symphony ( mostly the 2nd horn and 2nd trumpet ) is sometimes altered by performers to avoid large leaps ( those of a 12th or more ) , as leaps of this sort are very difficult to perform on brass instruments and may be consistently and flawlessly executed only by highly proficient musicians .
Beethoven 's indication that the 2nd bassoon should double the basses in measures 115–164 of the finale was not included in the Breitkopf parts , though it was included in the full score .
The London Philharmonic Choir debuted on 15 May 1947 performing the Ninth Symphony with the London Philharmonic Orchestra under the baton of Victor de Sabata at the Royal Albert Hall .
In 1951 Wilhelm Furtwängler and the Bayreuth Festival Orchestra reopened the Bayreuth Festival with a performance of the symphony , after the Allies temporarily suspended the Festival following the Second World War .
Political significance has attached to Beethoven 's Ninth : Leonard Bernstein conducted a version of the 9th at the Brandenburg Gate , with " " ( " Freedom" ) replacing " " ( " Joy" ) , to celebrate the fall of the Berlin Wall during Christmas 1989 .
This concert was performed by an orchestra and chorus made up of many nationalities : from Germany , the Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra and Chorus , the Chorus of the Berlin Radio Symphony Orchestra , and members of the Sächsische Staatskapelle Dresden , the Philharmonischer Kinderchor Dresden ; members of the orchestra of the Kirov Theatre ; from the United Kingdom , members of the London Symphony Orchestra ; from the USA , members of the New York Philharmonic ; and from France , members of the Orchestre de Paris .
Soloists were June Anderson , soprano , Sarah Walker , mezzo-soprano , Klaus König , tenor , and Jan-Hendrik Rootering , bass .
It was the last time that Bernstein conducted the symphony ; he died ten months later .
Bernstein made his first recording of the Beethoven Ninth in 1964 with the New York Philharmonic , for Columbia Masterworks , with soloists Martina Arroyo ( soprano ) , Regina Safarty ( mezzo ) , Nicholas di Virgilio (tenor ) , Norman Scott ( bass ) , and the Juilliard Chorus .
It was the first of three complete recordings of the Ninth that Bernstein made .
He made his second recording of the piece with the Vienna Philharmonic for Deutsche Grammophon , in 1979 .
This second one featured Gwyneth Jones ( soprano ) , Hanna Schwarz ( mezzo ) , René Kollo , and Kurt Moll ( bass ) , with the chorus of the Vienna State Opera .
Sir Georg Solti recorded the symphony with the Chicago Symphony Orchestra several times .
Their last recording of this symphony in 1986 won the Grammy for Best Orchestral Recording .
There have been various attempts to record the Ninth to come closer to what Beethoven 's contemporaries would have heard , i .e . , with period instruments .
Roger Norrington conducting the London Classical Players recorded it with period instruments for a 1987 release by EMI Records ( rereleased in 1997 under the Virgin Classics label ) .
Benjamin Zander made a 1992 recording of the Ninth with the Boston Philharmonic Orchestra and noted soprano Dominique Labelle ( who first performed the work with Robert Shaw ) , following Beethoven 's own metronome markings .
12 years later after Norrington , Philippe Herreweghe recorded the Ninth with his period-instrument Orchestre des Champs-Élysées and his Collegium Vocale chorus for Harmonia Mundi in 1999 .
Sir John Eliot Gardiner recorded his period-instrument version of the Ninth Symphony , conducting his Monteverdi Choir and Orchestre Révolutionnaire et Romantique in 1992 .
It was first released by Deutsche Grammophon in 1994 on their early music Archiv Produktion label as part of his complete cycle of the Beethoven symphonies .
His soloists included Ľuba Orgonášová , Anne Sofie von Otter , Anthony Rolfe Johnson and Gilles Cachemaille .
An additional period-instrument recording by Christopher Hogwood and the Academy of Ancient Music was released in 1997 under the label Éditions de l'Oiseau-Lyre .
At 79 minutes , one of the longest Ninths recorded is Karl Böhm 's , conducting the Vienna Philharmonic in 1981 with Jessye Norman and Plácido Domingo among the soloists .
Osmo Vänskä , conducting the Minnesota Orchestra , recorded the symphony as part of a cycle of all the Beethoven symphonies .
Released on the BIS label , it included soloists Helena Juntunen , Katarina Karnéus , Daniel Norman and Neal Davies , as well as the Minnesota Chorale .
It received a positive critical reception , including a Grammy Award nomination in the Best Orchestral Performance category .
Many later composers of the Romantic period and beyond were influenced specifically by Beethoven 's Ninth Symphony .
An important theme in the finale of Johannes Brahms ' Symphony No. 1 in C minor is related to the " Ode to Joy " theme from the last movement of Beethoven 's Ninth symphony .
When this was pointed out to Brahms , he is reputed to have retorted " Any fool can see that ! " Brahms 's first symphony was , at times , both praised and derided as " Beethoven 's Tenth" .
The Ninth symphony influenced the forms that Bruckner used for the movements of his symphonies .
Bruckner 's Symphony No. 3 is in the same D minor key as Beethoven 's 9th and makes substantial use of thematic ideas from it .
The colossal slow movement of Bruckner 's Symphony No. 7 , " as usual" , takes the same A–B–A–B–A form as the 3rd movement of Beethoven 's symphony , and also uses some figuration from it .
In the opening notes of the third movement of his Symphony No. 9 ( The " New World " ) , Antonín Dvořák pays homage to the scherzo of this symphony with his falling fourths and timpani strokes .
Likewise , Béla Bartók borrows the opening motif of the Scherzo from Beethoven 's Ninth symphony to introduce the second movement Scherzo in his own , Four Orchestral Pieces , op .
One legend is that the Compact Disc was deliberately designed to have a 74-minute playing time in order to accommodate the length of Beethoven 's Ninth Symphony .
Kees Immink , Philips ' chief engineer , who developed the CD , recalls that a commercial tug-of-war between the development partners , Sony and Philips , led to a settlement in a neutral 12-cm diameter format .
The 1951 performance of the Ninth Symphony by Furtwängler was brought forward as the perfect excuse for the change .
A Philips news release on August 16 , 2007 , celebrating the 25th anniversary of the Compact Disc , mentioned the parties—Philips and Sony—extended the Compact Disc capacity to 74 minutes to accommodate a complete performance of Beethoven 's 9th Symphony .
During the division of Germany in the Cold War , the " Ode to Joy " segment of the symphony was also played in lieu of an anthem at the Olympic Games for the Unified Team of Germany between 1956 and 1968 .
In 1972 , the musical backing ( without the words ) was adopted as the Anthem of Europe by the Council of Europe and subsequently by the European Communities ( now the European Union ) in 1985 .
The " Ode to Joy " was used as the national anthem of Rhodesia between 1974 and 1979 , as " Rise , O Voices of Rhodesia" .
In 1907 , the Presbyterian pastor Henry van Dyke wrote the hymn " Joyful , Joyful , we adore thee " while staying at Williams College .
The hymn is commonly sung in English-language churches to the " Hymn to Joy " melody from Beethoven 's 9th symphony .
The Symphony No. 9 , with accompanying chorus , is traditionally performed throughout Japan during its New Year 's celebrations .
In December 2009 , for example , there were 55 performances of the symphony by various major orchestras and choirs in Japan.Uranaka , Taiga , " Beethoven concert to fete students ' wartime sendoff" , " The Japan Times " , 1 December 1999 , retrieved on 24 December 2010 .</ref>
The Ninth was introduced to Japan by German soldiers held at the Bandō prisoner-of-war camp during World War I.
Japanese orchestras , notably the NHK Symphony Orchestra , began performing the symphony in 1925 .
During World War II , the Imperial government promoted performances of the symphony , including on New Year 's Eve , to encourage allegiance to Japanese nationalism .
The symphony was considered appropriate in this regard because Germany was an ally of Japan .
After the war , orchestras and choruses , undergoing economic hard times during the reconstruction of Japan , promoted performances of the piece around New Year because of the popularity of the music with the public .
In the 1960s , performances of the symphony for the New Year became more widespread and included participation by local choirs and orchestras , establishing the tradition which continues to this day – and which includes , since 2003 , a concert of all nine symphonies .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Benin ( ; , formerly Dahomey ) , officially the Republic of Benin ( ) , is a country in West Africa .
It is bordered by Togo to the west , by Nigeria to the east and by Burkina Faso and Niger to the north .
A majority of the population live on its small southern coastline on the Bight of Benin , part of the Gulf of Guinea in the northernmost tropical portion of the Atlantic Ocean .
The capital of Benin is Porto-Novo , but the seat of government is in Cotonou , the country 's largest city and economic capital .
Benin covers an area of approximately 115,000 square kilometers ( 42,000 sq mi) , with a population of approximately 9.98 million .
Benin is a tropical , sub-Saharan nation , highly dependent on agriculture , with substantial employment and income arising from subsistence farming .
However , indigenous languages such as Fon and Yoruba are commonly spoken .
The largest religious group in Benin is Roman Catholicism , followed closely by Islam , Vodun and Protestantism .
Benin is a member of the United Nations , the African Union , the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation , South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone , La Francophonie , the Community of Sahel-Saharan States , the African Petroleum Producers Association and the Niger Basin Authority .
From the 17th to the 19th century , the main political entities in the area were the Kingdom of Dahomey along with the city-state of Porto-Novo and a large area with many different tribes to the north .
This region was referred to as the Slave Coast from as early as the 17th century due to the large number of slaves shipped to the New World during the Trans-Atlantic slave trade .
After slavery was abolished , France took over the country and renamed it French Dahomey .
In 1960 , Dahomey gained full independence from France , and had a tumultuous period with many different democratic governments , many military coups and military governments .
A Marxist-Leninist state called the People 's Republic of Benin existed between 1972 and 1990 .
In 1991 , it was replaced by the current multi-party Republic of Benin .
During the colonial period and at independence , the country was known as Dahomey .
It was renamed on November 30 , 1975 , to Benin after the body of water on which the country lies – the Bight of Benin – which , in turn , had been named after the Benin Empire .
The country of Benin has no connection to Benin City in modern Nigeria , nor to the Benin bronzes .
The new name , Benin , was chosen for its neutrality .
Dahomey was the name of the former Kingdom of Dahomey , which covered only most of the southern third of the present country and therefore did not represent Porto-Novo ( a rival state in the south ) , the northwestern sector Atakora , nor the kingdom of Borgu , which covered the northeastern third .
The capital 's name Porto-Novo is of Portuguese origin meaning " New Port . "
It was originally developed as a port for the slave trade .
The current country of Benin combines three areas which had different political and ethnic systems prior to French colonial control .
Before 1700 , there were a few important city states along the coast ( primarily of the Aja ethnic group , but also including Yoruba and Gbe peoples ) and a mass of tribal regions inland ( composed of Bariba , Mahi , Gedevi , and Kabye peoples ) .
The Oyo Empire , located primarily to the east of modern Benin , was the most significant large-scale military force in the region and it would regularly conduct raids and exact tribute from the coastal kingdoms and the tribal regions .
The situation changed in the 1600s and early 1700s as the Kingdom of Dahomey , which was of the Fon ethnicity , was founded on the Abomey plateau and began taking over areas along the coast .
By 1727 , king Agaja of the Kingdom of Dahomey had conquered the coastal cities of Allada and Whydah , but it had become a tributary of the Oyo empire and did not directly attack the Oyo allied city-state of Porto-Novo .
The rise of the kingdom of Dahomey , the rivalry between the kingdom and the city of Porto-Novo , and the continued tribal politics of the northern region .
This ethnic and political division persisted into the colonial and post-colonial periods .
The Dahomey Kingdom was known for its culture and traditions .
Young boys were often apprenticed to older soldiers , and taught the kingdom 's military customs until they were old enough to join the army .
Dahomey was also famous for instituting an elite female soldier corps , called Ahosi i .e . the king 's wives or Mino , "our mothers " in the Fon language Fongbe , and known by many Europeans as the Dahomean Amazons .
This emphasis on military preparation and achievement earned Dahomey the nickname of "black Sparta " from European observers and 19th century explorers like Sir Richard Burton .
The kings of Dahomey sold their war captives into transatlantic slavery ; otherwise the captives would have been killed in a ceremony known as the Annual Customs .
By about 1750 , the King of Dahomey was earning an estimated £250,000 per year by selling Africans to the European slave-traders .
Though the leaders of Dahomey appeared initially to resist the slave trade , it flourished in the region of Dahomey for almost three hundred years ( beginning in 1472 with a trade agreement with Portuguese merchants ) , leading to the area being named " the Slave Coast " .
Court protocols , which demanded that a portion of war captives from the kingdom 's many battles be decapitated , decreased the number of enslaved people exported from the area .
The number went from 102,000 people per decade in the 1780s to 24,000 per decade by the 1860s .
The decline was partly due to the banning of the trans-Atlantic slave trade by Britain and other countries .
This decline continued until 1885 , when the last slave ship departed from the coast of the present-day Benin Republic bound for Brazil .
By the middle of the nineteenth century , Dahomey started to lose its status as the regional power .
This enabled the French to take over the area in 1892 .
In 1899 , the French included the land called French Dahomey within the French West Africa colony .
In 1958 , France granted autonomy to the Republic of Dahomey , and full independence as of August 1 , 1960 .
The president who led them to independence was Hubert Maga .
For the next twelve years , ethnic strife contributed to a period of turbulence .
There were several coups and regime changes , with four figures dominating— Hubert Maga , Sourou Apithy , Justin Ahomadegbé , and Emile Derlin Zinsou—the first three each representing a different area and ethnicity of the country .
These three agreed to form a Presidential Council after violence marred the 1970 elections .
On May 7 , 1972 , Maga turned over power to Ahomadegbe .
On October 26 , 1972 , Lt . Col . Mathieu Kérékou overthrew the ruling triumvirate , becoming president and stating that the country will not "burden itself by copying foreign ideology , and wants neither Capitalism , Communism , nor Socialism" .
On November 30 , however , he announced that the country was officially Marxist , under the control of the Military Council of the Revolution ( CNR ) , which nationalized the petroleum industry and banks .
On November 30 , 1975 , he renamed the country to the People 's Republic of Benin .
In 1979 , the CNR was dissolved , and Kérékou arranged show elections where he was the only allowed candidate .
Establishing relations with the People 's Republic of China , North Korea , and Libya , he put nearly all businesses and economic activities under state control , causing foreign investment in Benin to dry up .
Kérékou attempted to reorganize education , pushing his own aphorisms such as " Poverty is not a fatality" , resulting in a mass exodus of teachers , along with a large number of other professionals .
The regime financed itself by contracting to take nuclear waste first from the Soviet Union and later from France .
In 1980 , Kérékou converted to Islam and changed his first name to Ahmed , then changed his name back after claiming to be a born-again Christian .
In 1989 , riots broke out after the regime did not have money to pay its army .
Eventually Kérékou renounced Marxism and a convention forced Kérékou to release political prisoners and arrange elections .
Marxism-Leninism was also abolished as the nation 's form of government .
The name of the country was officially changed to the Republic of Benin on March 1 , 1990 , once the newly formed country 's constitution was complete .
In 1991 , Kérékou was defeated by Nicéphore Soglo , and became the first black African president to step down after an election .
Kérékou returned to power after winning the 1996 vote .
In 2001 , a closely fought election resulted in Kérékou winning another term , after which his opponents claimed election irregularities .
In 1999 , Kérékou issued a national apology for the central role Africans played in the Atlantic slave trade .
Kérékou and former president Soglo did not run in the 2006 elections , as both were barred by the constitution 's restrictions on age and total terms of candidates .
On March 5 , 2006 , an election was held that was considered free and fair .
It resulted in a runoff between Yayi Boni and Adrien Houngbédji .
The runoff election was held on March 19 , and was won by Boni , who assumed office on April 6 .
The success of the fair multi-party elections in Benin won praise internationally .
Boni was reelected in 2011 , taking 53.18 % of the vote in the first round—enough to avoid a runoff election , becoming the first president to win an election without a runoff since the restoration of democracy in 1991 .
Benin 's politics take place in a framework of a presidential representative democratic republic , where the President of Benin is both head of state and head of government , within a multi-party system .
Legislative power is vested in both the government and the legislature .
The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature .
The political system is derived from the 1990 Constitution of Benin and the subsequent transition to democracy in 1991 .
Benin scored highly in the 2013 Ibrahim Index of African Governance , which comprehensively measures the state of governance across the continent .
Benin was ranked 12th out of 52 African countries , and scored particularly well in the categories of Safety & Security and Participation & Human Rights .
In its 2007 Worldwide Press Freedom Index , Reporters Without Borders ranked Benin 53rd out of 169 countries .
Benin has been rated equal-88th out of 159 countries in a 2005 analysis of police , business and political corruption .
Benin is divided into twelve departments ( French : "départements " ) which , in turn , are subdivided into 77 communes .
In 1999 , the previous six departments were each split into two halves , forming the current twelve .
The six new departments have not yet been assigned official capitals .
Benin , a narrow , north–south strip of land in west Africa , lies between the Equator and the Tropic of Cancer .
Benin lies between latitudes 6° and 13°N , and longitudes 0° and 4°E.
Benin is bounded by Togo to the west , Burkina Faso and Niger to the north , Nigeria to the east , and the Bight of Benin to the south .
With an area of , Benin extends from the Niger River in the north to the Atlantic Ocean in the south , a distance of .
Although the coastline measures the country measures about at its widest point .
It is one of the smaller countries in West Africa , one-eighth the size of Nigeria , its neighbor to the east .
It is , however , twice as large as Togo , its neighbor to the west .
Benin shows little variation in elevation and can be divided into four areas from the south to the north , starting with the low-lying , sandy , coastal plain ( highest elevation ) which is , at most , wide .
It is marshy and dotted with lakes and lagoons communicating with the ocean .
Behind the coast lies the Guinean forest-savanna mosaic-covered plateaus of southern Benin ( altitude between ) , which are split by valleys running north to south along the Couffo , Zou , and Oueme Rivers .
Then an area of flat lands dotted with rocky hills whose altitude seldom reaches extends around Nikki and Save .
Finally , a range of mountains extends along the northwest border and into Togo ; this is the Atacora , with the highest point , Mont Sokbaro , at .
Benin has fields of lying fallow , mangroves , and remnants of large sacred forests .
In the rest of the country , the savanna is covered with thorny scrubs and dotted with huge baobab trees .
In the north and the northwest of Benin the Reserve du W du Niger and Pendjari National Park attract tourists eager to see elephants , lions , antelopes , hippos , and monkeys .
Pendjari National Park together with the bordering Parks Arli and W in Burkina Faso and Niger is one of the most important strongholds for the endangered West African lion .
With an estimated 356 ( range : 246–466 ) lions , W-Arli-Pendjari harbours the largest remaining population of lions in West Africa .
Historically Benin has served as habitat for the endangered Painted Hunting Dog , " Lycaon pictus " ; however , this canid is thought to have been locally extirpated .
Annual rainfall in the coastal area averages 1300 mm or about 51 inches .
Benin has two rainy and two dry seasons per year .
The principal rainy season is from April to late July , with a shorter less intense rainy period from late September to November .
The main dry season is from December to April , with a short cooler dry season from late July to early September .
Temperatures and humidity are high along the tropical coast .
In Cotonou , the average maximum temperature is ; the minimum is .
Variations in temperature increase when moving north through a savanna and plateau toward the Sahel .
A dry wind from the Sahara called the Harmattan blows from December to March , during which grass dries up , the vegetation turns reddish brown , and a veil of fine dust hangs over the country , causing the skies to be overcast .
It also is the season when farmers burn brush in the fields .
The economy of Benin is dependent on subsistence agriculture , cotton production , and regional trade .
Cotton accounts for 40 percent of GDP and roughly 80 percent of official export receipts .
Growth in real output has averaged around 5 percent in the past seven years , but rapid population growth has offset much of this increase .
Inflation has subsided over the past several years .
Benin uses the CFA franc , which is pegged to the euro .
Benin’s economy has continued to strengthen over the past years , with real GDP growth estimated at 5.1 and 5.7 percent in 2008 and 2009 , respectively .
The main driver of growth is the agricultural sector , with cotton being the country ’s main export , while services continue to contribute the largest part of GDP largely because of Benin’s geographical location , enabling trade , transportation , transit and tourism activities with its neighbouring states .
In order to raise growth still further , Benin plans to attract more foreign investment , place more emphasis on tourism , facilitate the development of new food processing systems and agricultural products , and encourage new information and communication technology .
Projects to improve the business climate by reforms to the land tenure system , the commercial justice system , and the financial sector were included in Benin 's US$ 307 million Millennium Challenge Account grant signed in February 2006 .
The Paris Club and bilateral creditors have eased the external debt situation , with Benin benefiting from a G8 debt reduction announced in July 2005 , while pressing for more rapid structural reforms .
An insufficient electrical supply continues to adversely affect Benin 's economic growth though the government recently has taken steps to increase domestic power production .
Although trade unions in Benin represent up to 75 % of the formal workforce , the large informal economy has been noted by the International Trade Union Confederation ( ITCU) to contain ongoing problems , including a lack of women 's wage equality , the use of child labour , and the continuing issue of forced labour .
Benin is a member of the Organization for the Harmonization of Business Law in Africa ( OHADA ) .
Cotonou harbors the country 's only seaport and international airport .
A new port is currently under construction between Cotonou and Porto Novo .
Benin is connected by two-lane asphalted roads to its neighboring countries ( Togo , Burkina Faso , Niger , and Nigeria ) .
Mobile telephone service is available across the country through various operators .
Benin is connected to the Internet by way of satellite connections ( since 1998 ) and a single submarine cable SAT-3/WASC ( since 2001 ) , keeping the price of data extremely high .
Relief is expected with initiation of the Africa Coast to Europe cable in 2011 .
Currently , about a third of the population live below the international poverty line of US$ 1.25 per day .
The majority of Benin 's population lives in the south .
The population is young , with a life expectancy of 59 years .
About 42 African ethnic groups live in this country ; these various groups settled in Benin at different times and also migrated within the country .
Ethnic groups include the Yoruba in the southeast ( migrated from Nigeria in the 12th century ) ; the Dendi in the north-central area ( who came from Mali in the 16th century ) ; the Bariba and the Fula ( ; ) in the northeast ; the Betammaribe and the Somba in the Atacora Range ; the Fon in the area around Abomey in the South Central and the Mina , Xueda , and Aja ( who came from Togo ) on the coast .
Recent migrations have brought other African nationals to Benin that include Nigerians , Togolese , and Malians .
The foreign community also includes many Lebanese and Indians involved in trade and commerce .
The personnel of the many European embassies and foreign aid missions and of nongovernmental organizations and various missionary groups account for a large part of the European population .
A small part of the European population consists of Beninese citizens of French ancestry , whose ancestors ruled Benin and left after independence .
During the 1980s , less than 30 % of the population had access to primary health care services .
Benin had one of the highest death rates for children under the age of five in the world .
Its infant mortality rate stood at 203 deaths for every live births .
Only one in three mothers had access to child health care services .
The Bamako Initiative changed that dramatically by introducing community-based health care reform , resulting in more efficient and equitable provision of services .
A comprehensive approach strategy was extended to all areas of health care , with subsequent improvement in the health care indicators and improvement in health care efficiency and cost .
Demographic and Health Surveys has completed three surveys in Benin since 1996 .
Beninese literature had a strong oral tradition long before French became the dominant language .
Felix Couchoro wrote the first Beninese novel , " L'Esclave " in 1929 .
Post-independence , the country was home to a vibrant and innovative music scene , where native folk music combined with Ghanaian highlife , French cabaret , American rock , funk and soul , and Congolese rumba .
Singer Angélique Kidjo and actor Djimon Hounsou were both born in Cotonou , Benin .
Filmmaker and actor Didier Chabi was born in Kandi , Benin .
Composer Wally Badarou and singer Gnonnas Pedro are also of Beninese descent .
Biennale Benin , continuing the projects of several organizations and artists started in the country in 2010 as a collaborative event called " Regard Benin" .
In 2012 , the project become a Biennial coordinated by the Consortium , a federation of local associations .
The international exhibition and artistic program of the 2012 Biennale Benin is curated by Abdellah Karroum and the Curatorial Delegation .
Many Beninois in the south of the country have Akan-based names indicating the day of the week on which they were born .
This is due to influence of the Akan people likely the Akwamu and others .
Local languages are used as the languages of instruction in elementary schools , with French only introduced after several years .
In wealthier cities , however , French is usually taught at an earlier age .
Beninese languages are generally transcribed with a separate letter for each speech sound ( phoneme ) , rather than using diacritics as in French or digraphs as in English .
This includes Beninese Yoruba , which in Nigeria is written with both diacritics and digraphs .
For instance , the mid vowels written " é è , ô , o " in French are written " " in Beninese languages , whereas the consonants written "ng " and " sh " or " ch " in English are written " ŋ " and " c . "
However , digraphs are used for nasal vowels and the labial-velar consonants "kp " and "gb , " as in the name of the Fon language " Fon gbe " , and diacritics are used as tone marks .
In French-language publications , a mixture of French and Beninese orthographies may be seen .
In the 2002 census , 42.8 % of the population of Benin were Christian ( 27.1 % Roman Catholic , 5 % Celestial Church of Christ , 3.2 % Methodist , 7.5 % other Christian denominations ) , 24.4 % were Muslim , 17.3 % practiced Vodun , 6 % other traditional local religious groups , 1.9 % other religious groups , and 6.5 % claim no religious affiliation .
Indigenous religions include local animistic religions in the Atakora ( Atakora and Donga provinces ) and Vodun and Orisha or Orisa veneration among the Yoruba and Tado peoples in the center and south of the country .
The town of Ouidah on the central coast is the spiritual center of Beninese Vodun .
The major introduced religions are Christianity , followed throughout the south and center of Benin and in Otammari country in the Atakora , and Islam , introduced by the Songhai Empire and Hausa merchants , and now followed throughout Alibori , Borgou , and Donga provinces , as well as among the Yoruba ( who also follow Christianity ) .
Many , however , continue to hold Vodun and Orisha beliefs and have incorporated the pantheon of Vodun and Orisha into Christianity .
The Ahmadiyya Muslim Community , a sect originating in the 19th century is also present , in a significant minority .
The literacy rate in Benin is among the lowest in the world : in 2010 it was estimated to be 42.4 % ( 55.2 % for males and 30.3 % for females ) .
Although at one time the education system was not free , Benin has abolished school fees and is carrying out the recommendations of its 2007 Educational Forum .
Beninese cuisine is known in Africa for its exotic ingredients and flavorful dishes .
Beninese cuisine involves lots of fresh meals served with a variety of key sauces .
In southern Benin cuisine , the most common ingredient is corn , often used to prepare dough which is mainly served with peanut- or tomato-based sauces .
Fish and chicken are the most common meats used in southern Beninese cuisine , but beef , goat , and bush rat are also consumed .
The main staple in northern Benin is yams , often served with sauces mentioned above .
The population in the northern provinces use beef and pork meat which is fried in palm or peanut oil or cooked in sauces .
Couscous , rice , and beans are commonly eaten , along with fruits such as mangoes , oranges , avocados , bananas , kiwi fruit , and pineapples .
Meat is usually quite expensive , and meals are generally light on meat and generous on vegetable fat .
Frying in palm or peanut oil is the most common meat preparation , and smoked fish is commonly prepared in Benin .
Grinders are used to prepare corn flour , which is made into a dough and served with sauces .
" Chicken on the spit " is a traditional recipe in which chicken is roasted over fire on wooden sticks .
Palm roots are sometimes soaked in a jar with saltwater and sliced garlic to tenderize them , then used in dishes .
Many people have outdoor mud stoves for cooking .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Brazil has both modern technologies in the center-south portion , counting with 3G HSPA , DSL ISDB based Digital TV .
Other areas of the country , particularly the north and north-west regions , lack even basic analog PSTN telephone lines .
This is a problem that the government is trying to solve by linking the liberation of new technologies such as WiMax and FTTH) only tied with compromises on extension of the service to less populated regions .
The Brazilian fixed-line sector is fully open to competition and continues to attract operators .
The bulk of the market is divided between four operators : Telefónica , América Móvil , Oi ( controlled by Brazilian investors and Portugal Telecom ) , and GVT ( owned by Vivendi) .
Telefonica operates through Telefonica Brasil , which has integrated its fixed-line and mobile services under the brand name Vivo .
The América Móvil group in Brazil comprises long-distance incumbent Embratel , mobile operator Claro , and cable TV provider Net Serviços .
The group has started to integrate its fixed and mobile services under the brand name Claro , previously used only for mobile services .
Oi offers fixed line and mobile services under the Oi brand name .
GVT is the country ’s most successful alternative network provider , offering fixed-line services only .
extensive microwave radio relay system and a domestic satellite system with 64 earth stations .
country code - 55 ; landing point for a number of submarine cables , including Atlantis 2 , that provide direct links to South and Central America , the Caribbean , the US , Africa , and Europe ; satellite earth stations - 3 Intelsat ( Atlantic Ocean ) , 1 Inmarsat ( Atlantic Ocean region east ) , connected by microwave relay system to Mercosur Brazilsat B3 satellite earth station ( 2007 )
The history of mobile telephony in Brazil began on 30 December 1990 , when the Cellular Mobile System began operating in the city of Rio de Janeiro , with a capacity for 10,000 terminals .
At that time , according to Anatel ( the national telecommunications agency ) , there were 667 devices in the country .
The number of devices rose to 6,700 in the next year , to 30,000 in 1992 .
In November 2007 3G services were launched , and increased rapidly to almost 90 % of the population in 2012 and the agreements signed as part of the auction specify a 3G coverage obligation of 100 % of population by 2019 .
After the auction that took place in June 2012 , LTE tests were undertaken in several cities , tourist locations and international conference venues .
The first LTE-compatible devices became available in the local market and LTE services was commercially launched in 2013 .
Under the 4G licence terms , operators were required to have commercial networks in all twelve state capitals which are acting as host cities for the 2014 FIFA World Cup .
The mobile market is ruled by 4 companies :
Several submarine cables link Brazil to the world :
All these cables have a bandwidth from 20 Gbit/s to 80 Gbit/s , and some have a projected final capacity of more than 1 Tbit/s .
List of business and satellites they operate ( Brazilian Geostationary Satellites )
Under the Brazilian constitution , television and radio are not treated as telecommunication ways to avoid creating problems with a series of regulations that reduce and control how international businesses and persons participate on it .
It is worth mentioning that Brazil has the 2nd biggest media conglomerate in the world in terms of revenue , Rede Globo .
The Internet has become quite popular in Brazil , with steadily growing numbers in adhesion and availability , with numbers that position Brazil at the 6th spot on number of users .
Many technologies are actually used to bring broadband Internet to consumers , with DSL and its variants being the most used , and 3G technologies .
4G technologies were introduced in April 2013 but with limited range , being compatible with only a few smartphones models .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Brunei is a country with a small , wealthy economy that is a mixture of foreign and domestic entrepreneurship , government regulation and welfare measures , and village tradition .
It is almost totally supported by exports of crude oil and natural gas , with revenues from the petroleum sector accounting for over half of GDP.
Per capita GDP is high , and substantial income from overseas investment supplements income from domestic production .
The government provides for all medical services and subsidizes food and housing .
The government has shown progress in its basic policy of diversifying the economy away from oil and gas .
Brunei 's leaders are concerned that steadily increased integration in the world economy will undermine internal social cohesion although it has taken steps to become a more prominent player by serving as chairman for the 2000 APEC ( Asian Pacific Economic Cooperation ) forum .
Growth in 1999 was estimated at 2.5 % due to higher oil prices in the second half .
Brunei is the third-largest oil producer in Southeast Asia , averaging about .
It also is the fourth-largest producer of liquefied natural gas in the world .
This is a chart of trend of gross domestic product of Brunei Darussalam at market prices estimated by the International Monetary Fund with figures in millions of Bruneian dollars .
For purchasing power parity comparisons , the US dollar is exchanged at 1.52 Bruneian dollars only . Mean wages were $ 25.38 per manhour in 2009 .
The government regulates the immigration of foreign labor out of concern it might disrupt Brunei 's society .
Work permits for foreigners are issued only for short periods and must be continually renewed .
Despite these restrictions , foreigners make up a significant portion of the work force .
The government reported a total work force of 122,800 in 1999 , with an unemployment rate of 5.5 % .
Oil and natural gas account for almost all exports .
Since only a few products other than petroleum are produced locally , a wide variety of items must be imported .
Brunei statistics show Singapore as the largest point of origin of imports , accounting for 25 % in 1997 .
However , this figure includes some transshipments , since most of Brunei 's imports transit Singapore .
As in many other countries , Japanese products dominate local markets for motor vehicles , construction equipment , electronic goods , and household appliances .
The United States was the third-largest supplier of imports to Brunei in 1998 .
Brunei 's substantial foreign reserves are managed by the Brunei Investment Agency ( BIA ) , an arm of the Ministry of Finance .
BIA 's guiding principle is to increase the real value of Brunei 's foreign reserves while pursuing a diverse investment strategy , with holdings in the United States , Japan , western Europe , and the Association of South East Asian Nations ( ASEAN ) countries .
The Brunei Government actively encourages more foreign investment .
New enterprises that meet certain criteria can receive pioneer status , exempting profits from income tax for up to 5 years , depending on the amount of capital invested .
The normal corporate income tax rate is 30 % .
There is no personal income tax or capital gains tax .
One of the government 's most important priorities is to encourage the development of Brunei Malays as leaders of industry and commerce .
There are no specific restrictions of foreign equity ownership , but local participation , both shared capital and management , is encouraged .
Such participation helps when tendering for contracts with the government or Brunei Shell Petroleum .
Companies in Brunei must either be incorporated locally or registered as a branch of a foreign company and must be registered with the Registrar of Companies .
Public companies must have a minimum of seven shareholders .
Private companies must have a minimum of two but not more than 50 shareholders .
At least half of the directors in a company must be residents of Brunei .
The government owns a cattle farm in Australia that supplies most of the country 's beef .
At , this ranch is larger than Brunei itself .
Eggs and chickens are largely produced locally , but most of Brunei 's other food needs must be imported .
Agriculture and fisheries are among the industrial sectors that the government has selected for highest priority in its efforts to diversify the economy .
Brunei Shell Petroleum ( BSP) , a joint venture owned in equal shares by the Brunei Government and the Royal Dutch/Shell group of companies , is the chief oil and gas production company in Brunei .
BSP and four sister companies constitute the largest employer in Brunei after the government .
BSP 's small refinery has a distillation capacity of .
This satisfies domestic demand for most petroleum products .
The French oil company Elf Aquitaine became active in petroleum exploration in Brunei in the 1980s .
Its affiliate Elf Petroleum Asia BV has discovered commercially exploitable quantities of oil and gas in three of the four wells drilled since 1987 , including a particularly promising discovery announced in early 1990 .
Recently , UNOCAL , partnered with New Zealand 's Fletcher Challenge has been granted concessions for oil exploration .
Brunei is preparing to tender concessions for deep water oil and gas exploration .
Brunei 's oil production peaked in 1979 at over .
Since then it has been deliberately cut back to extend the life of oil reserves and improve recovery rates .
Japan has traditionally been the main customer for Brunei 's oil exports , but its share dropped from 45 % of the total in 1982 to 19 % in 1998 .
In contrast , oil exports to South Korea increased from only 8 % of the total in 1982 to 29 % in 1998 .
Other major customers include Taiwan ( 6 % ) , and the countries of ASEAN ( 27 % ) .
Brunei 's oil exports to the United States accounted for 17 % of the total exported .
Almost all of Brunei 's natural gas is liquefied at Brunei Liquefied Natural Gas ( LNG ) plant , which opened in 1972 and is one of the largest LNG plants in the world .
Over 82 % of Brunei 's LNG produced is sold to Japan under a long-term agreement renewed in 1993 .
The agreement calls for Brunei to provide over 5 million tons of LNG per year to three Japanese utilities .
The Japanese company , Mitsubishi , is a joint venture partner with Shell and the Brunei Government in Brunei LNG , Brunei Coldgas , and Brunei Shell Tankers , which together produce the LNG and supply it to Japan .
Since 1995 , Brunei has supplied more than 700,000 tons of LNG to the Korea Gas Corporation as well .
In 1999 , Brunei 's natural gas production reached 90 cargoes per day .
A small amount of natural gas is used for domestic power generation .
Brunei is the fourth-largest exporter of LNG in the Asia-Pacific region behind Indonesia , Malaysia , and Australia .
Brunei 's proven oil and gas reserves are sufficient until at least 2015 , and planned deep sea exploration is expected to find significant new reserves .
The government sought in the past decade to diversify the economy with limited success .
Oil and gas and government spending still account for most of Brunei 's economic activity .
Brunei 's non-petroleum industries include agriculture , forestry , fishing , and banking .
In the western part of the country , Liang is currently experiencing a major development with the establishment of SPARK
, which is a 271 hectare site developed to be a world class petrochemical hub .
The first major investment at SPARK is the USD450 million Methanol plant developed by the Brunei Methanol Company , a joint venture between Petroleum Brunei and two leading Japanese companies , Mitsubishi Chemical Holdings Corporation and Itochu Corporation .
The plant design will give an output of 2,500t of methanol per day ( 850,000t annually ) .
The plant was officially launched by His Majesty Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah on the 25th of May 2010 .
Brunei Darussalam in July 2009 launched its national halal branding scheme Brunei Halal which allows manufacturers in Brunei and in other countries to use the premium Brunei Halal trademark to help them penetrate lucrative markets in countries with significant numbers of Muslim consumers .
The Brunei Halal brand is said to be the first proper attempt to put together a global halal brand that will reap the potential commercial returns of catering to the consumption needs of Muslims worldwide .
As envisioned by the Sultanate , the use of the Brunei Halal brand would signify to Muslim consumers the manufacturers ' strict compliance with laws relating to Islamic teachings .
Brunei also aims to build confidence in the brand through strategies that will both ensure the halal integrity of the products and unfaltering compliance with set rules governing the sourcing of raw materials , manufacturing process , logistics and distribution .
A new company , government-owned Brunei Wafirah Holdings Sdn Bhd , has been established as the owner of the Brunei Halal brand .
Wafirah has entered into a joint venture with Brunei Global Islamic Investment and Hong Kong-based logistics firm Kerry FSDA Limited to form Ghanim International Food Corporation Sdn Bhd .
Ghanim International manages the use of the Brunei Halal trademark .
Producers that want to use the brand are required to first acquire the Brunei halal label ( or the certification for compliance with accepted manufacturing and slaughtering practices under Islam ) through the Department of Syariah Affairs ' Halal Food Control Section .
They can then approach Ghanim for their application to use the brand .
This is a chart of trend of gross domestic product of Brunei Darussalam at market prices estimated by the International Monetary Fund with figures in millions of Bruneian Dollars .
In the 1970s , Brunei invested sharply increasing revenues from petroleum exports and maintained government spending at a low and constant rate .
Consequently , the government was able to build its foreign reserves and invest them around the world to help provide for future generations .
Part of the reserve earnings were reportedly also used to help finance the government 's annual budget deficit .
Since 1986 , however , petroleum revenues have decreased , and government spending has increased .
The government has been running a budget deficit since 1988 .
The disappearance of a revenue surplus has made Brunei 's economy more vulnerable to petroleum price fluctuations .
Brunei 's gross domestic product ( GDP ) soared with the petroleum price increases of the 1970s to a peak of $ 5.7 billion in 1980 .
It declined slightly in each of the next 5 years , then fell by almost 30 % in 1986 .
This drop was caused by a combination of sharply lower petroleum prices in world markets and voluntary production cuts in Brunei .
The GDP recovered somewhat since 1986 , growing by 12 % in 1987 , 1 % in 1988 , and 9 % in 1989 .
In recent years , GDP growth was 3.5 % in 1996 , 4.0 % in 1997 , 1.0 % in 1998 , and an estimated 2.5 % in 1999 .
However , the 1999 GDP was still only about $ 4.5 billion , well below the 1980 peak .
The Asian financial crisis in 1997 and 1998 , coupled with fluctuations in the price of oil have created uncertainty and instability in Brunei 's economy .
In addition , the 1998 collapse of Amedeo Development Corporation , Brunei 's largest construction firm whose projects helped fuel the domestic economy , caused the country to slip into a mild recession .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Burundi is located in central Africa , to the east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo , at the co-ordinates .
Burundi occupies an area equal to in size , of which is land .
The country has of land border : of which is shared with the Democratic Republic of the Congo , with Rwanda and with Tanzania .
As a landlocked country , Burundi possesses no coastline .
It straddles the crest of the Congo-Nile Divide which separates the basins of the Congo and Nile rivers .
The farthest headwaters of the Nile , the Ruvyironza River , has its source in Burundi .
Burundi in general has a tropical highland climate , with a considerable daily temperature range in many areas .
Temperature also varies considerably from one region to another , chiefly as a result of differences in altitude .
The central plateau enjoys pleasantly cool weather , with an average temperature of .
The area around Lake Tanganyika is warmer , averaging ; the highest mountain areas are cooler , averaging .
Rain is irregular , falling most heavily in the northwest .
Dry seasons vary in length , and there are sometimes long periods of drought .
However , four seasons can be distinguished : the long dry season ( June–August ) , the short wet season ( September–November ) , the short dry season ( December–January ) , and the long wet season ( February–May ) .
Most of Burundi receives between of rainfall a year .
The Ruzizi Plain and the northeast receive between
The terrain of Burundi is hilly and mountainous , dropping to a plateau in the east .
The southern and eastern plains have been categorised by the World Wildlife Fund as part of the Central Zambezian Miombo woodlands ecoregion .
The lowest point in the country is at Lake Tanganyika , at , with the highest point being on Mount Heha , at .
Natural hazards are posed in Burundi by flooding and landslides .
Burundi possesses reserves of : nickel , uranium , rare earth oxides , peat , cobalt , copper , platinum ( not yet exploited ) and vanadium .
There is also arable land and the potential for hydropower .
The table below describes land use in Burundi .
Soil erosion is an issue for Burundi , and is as a result of overgrazing and the expansion of agriculture into marginal lands .
Other issues include : deforestation , due to the uncontrolled cutting-down of trees for fuel ; and habitat loss threatens wildlife populations .
Burundi is a party to the following international agreements that relate to the environment : Biodiversity , Climate Change , Desertification , Endangered Species , Hazardous Wastes and Ozone Layer Protection .
The following have been signed but not yet ratified by Burundi : Law of the Sea and Nuclear Test Ban .
This is a list of the extreme points of Burundi , the points that are farther north , south , east or west than any other location .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Bayerische Motoren Werke AG ( ; ) , commonly known as BMW or BMW AG , is a German automobile , motorcycle and engine manufacturing company founded in 1916 .
It also owns and produces Mini cars , and is the parent company of Rolls-Royce Motor Cars .
In 2012 , the BMW Group produced 1,845,186 automobiles and 117,109 motorcycles across all of its brands .
BMW is part of the " German Big 3" luxury automakers , along with Audi and Mercedes-Benz , which are the three best-selling luxury automakers in the world .
BMW was established as a business entity following a restructuring of the Rapp Motorenwerke aircraft manufacturing firm in 1917 .
After the end of World War I in 1918 , BMW was forced to cease aircraft-engine production by the terms of the Versailles Armistice Treaty .
The company consequently shifted to motorcycle production in 1923 , once the restrictions of the treaty started to be lifted , followed by automobiles in 1928–29 .
The first car which BMW successfully produced and the car which launched BMW on the road to automobile production was the Dixi , it was based on the Austin 7 and licensed from the Austin Motor Company in Birmingham , England .
BMW 's first significant aircraft engine was the BMW IIIa inline-six liquid-cooled engine of 1918 , much preferred for its high-altitude performance .
With German rearmament in the 1930s , the company again began producing aircraft engines for the Luftwaffe .
Among its successful World War II engine designs were the BMW 132 and BMW 801 air-cooled radial engines , and the pioneering BMW 003 axial-flow turbojet , which powered the tiny , 1944–1945–era jet-powered "emergency fighter" , the Heinkel He 162 " Spatz" .
The BMW 003 jet engine was tested in the A-1b version of the world 's first jet fighter , the Messerschmitt Me 262 , but BMW engines failed on takeoff , a major setback for the Emergency Fighter Program until successful testing with Junkers engines .
Towards the end of the Third Reich BMW developed some military aircraft projects for the " Luftwaffe" , the BMW Strahlbomber , the BMW Schnellbomber and the BMW Strahljäger , but none of them were built .
By the year 1959 , the automotive division of BMW was in financial difficulties and a shareholders meeting was held to decide whether to go into liquidation or find a way of carrying on .
It was decided to carry on and to try to cash in on the current economy car boom enjoyed so successfully by some of Germany 's ex-aircraft manufacturers such as Messerschmitt and Heinkel .
The rights to manufacture the Italian Iso Isetta were bought ; the tiny cars themselves were to be powered by a modified form of BMW 's own motorcycle engine .
This was moderately successful and helped the company get back on its feet .
The controlling majority shareholder of the BMW Aktiengesellschaft since 1959 is the Quandt family , which owns about 46 % of the stock .
BMW acquired the Hans Glas company based in Dingolfing , Germany , in 1966 .
Glas vehicles were briefly badged as BMW until the company was fully absorbed .
It was reputed that the acquisition was mainly to gain access to Glas ' development of the timing belt with an overhead camshaft in automotive applications , although some saw Glas ' Dingolfing plant as another incentive .
However , this factory was outmoded and BMW 's biggest immediate gain was , according to themselves , a stock of highly qualified engineers and other personnel .
The Glas factories continued to build a limited number of their existing models , while adding the manufacture of BMW front and rear axles until they could be closer incorporated into BMW.
In 1992 , BMW acquired a large stake in California based industrial design studio Designworks USA , which they fully acquired in 1995 .
In 1994 , BMW bought the British Rover Group ( which at the time consisted of the Rover , Land Rover and MG brands as well as the rights to defunct brands including Austin and Morris ) , and owned it for six years .
By 2000 , Rover was incurring huge losses and BMW decided to sell the combine .
The MG and Rover brands were sold to the Phoenix Consortium to form MG Rover , while Land Rover was taken over by Ford .
BMW, meanwhile , retained the rights to build the new Mini , which was launched in 2001 .
Chief designer Chris Bangle announced his departure from BMW in February 2009 , after serving on the design team for nearly seventeen years .
He was replaced by Adrian van Hooydonk , Bangle 's former right hand man .
Bangle was known for his radical designs such as the 2002 7-Series and the 2002 Z4 .
In July 2007 , the production rights for Husqvarna Motorcycles was purchased by BMW for a reported 93 million euros .
BMW Motorrad plans to continue operating Husqvarna Motorcycles as a separate enterprise .
All development , sales and production activities , as well as the current workforce , have remained in place at its present location at Varese .
In June 2012 , BMW was listed as the # 1 most reputable company in the world by Forbes.com .
Rankings are based upon aspects such as "people 's willingness to buy , recommend , work for , and invest in a company is driven 60 % by their perceptions of the company and only 40 % by their perceptions of their products . "
In 2006 , the BMW group ( including Mini and Rolls-Royce ) produced 1,366,838 four-wheeled vehicles , which were manufactured in five countries .
In 2010 , it manufactured 1,481,253 four-wheeled vehicles and 112,271 motorcycles ( under both the BMW and Husqvarna brands ) .
The BMW X3 ( E83 ) was made by Magna Steyr , a subsidiary of Magna of Canada , in Graz , Austria under license from BMW until 2010 .
Starting October 2010 , the new BMW X3 ( F25 ) is produced at BMW US Manufacturing Co. , Greer , Spartanburg County , South Carolina , USA
It is reported that about 56 % of BMW-brand vehicles produced are powered by petrol engines and the remaining 44 % are powered by diesel engines .
Of those petrol vehicles , about 27 % are four-cylinder models and about nine percent are eight-cylinder models .
BMW also has local assembly operation using complete knock down components in Thailand , Russia , Egypt , Indonesia , Malaysia , and India , for 3 , 5 , 7 series and X3 .
Vehicles sold in all markets according to BMW 's annual reports .
BMW began production of motorcycle engines and then motorcycles after World War I. Its motorcycle brand is now known as BMW Motorrad .
Their first successful motorcycle , after the failed Helios and Flink , was the " R32 " in 1923 .
This had a "boxer " twin engine , in which a cylinder projects into the air-flow from each side of the machine .
Apart from their single-cylinder models ( basically to the same pattern ) , all their motorcycles used this distinctive layout until the early 1980s .
Many BMWs are still produced in this layout , which is designated the R Series .
During the Second World War , BMW produced the BMW R75 motorcycle with a sidecar attached .
Having a unique design copied from the Zündapp KS750 , its sidecar wheel was also motor-driven .
Combined with a lockable differential , this made the vehicle very capable off-road , an equivalent in many ways to the Jeep.
In 1982 , came the K Series , shaft drive but water-cooled and with either three or four cylinders mounted in a straight line from front to back .
Shortly after , BMW also started making the chain-driven F and G series with single and parallel twin Rotax engines .
In the early 1990s , BMW updated the airhead Boxer engine which became known as the oilhead .
In 2002 , the oilhead engine had two spark plugs per cylinder .
In 2004 it added a built-in balance shaft , an increased capacity to 1,170 cc and enhanced performance to for the R1200GS , compared to of the previous R1150GS.
More powerful variants of the oilhead engines are available in the R1100S and R1200S , producing , respectively .
In 2004 , BMW introduced the new K1200S Sports Bike which marked a departure for BMW.
It had an engine producing , derived from the company 's work with the Williams F1 team , and is lighter than previous K models .
Innovations include electronically adjustable front and rear suspension , and a Hossack-type front fork that BMW calls Duolever .
BMW introduced anti-lock brakes on production motorcycles starting in the late 1980s .
The generation of anti-lock brakes available on the 2006 and later BMW motorcycles pave the way for the introduction of electronic stability control , or anti-skid technology later in the 2007 model year .
BMW has been an innovator in motorcycle suspension design , taking up telescopic front suspension long before most other manufacturers .
Then they switched to an Earles fork , front suspension by swinging fork ( 1955 to 1969 ) .
Most modern BMWs are truly rear swingarm , single sided at the back ( compare with the regular swinging fork usually , and wrongly , called swinging arm ) .
Some BMWs started using yet another trademark front suspension design , the Telelever , in the early 1990s .
Like the Earles fork , the Telelever significantly reduces dive under braking .
BMW Group , on 31 January 2013 announced that Pierer Industrie AG has bought Husqvarna for an undisclosed amount , which will not be revealed by either party in the future .
The company is headed by Stephan pierer ( CEO of KTM) .
Pierer Industrie AG is 51 % owner of KTM and 100 % owner of Husqvarna .
The " New Class " ( German : " Neue Klasse " ) was a line of compact sedans and coupes starting with the 1962 1500 and continuing through the last 2002s in 1977 .
Powered by BMW 's celebrated four-cylinder M10 engine , the New Class models had a fully independent suspension , MacPherson struts in front , and front disc brakes .
Initially a family of four-door sedans and two-door coupes , the New Class line was broadened to two-door sports sedans with the addition of the " 02 Series " 1600 and 2002 in 1966 .
Sharing little in common with the rest of the line beyond power train , the sporty siblings caught auto enthusiasts ' attention and established BMW as an international brand .
Precursors to the famed BMW 3 Series , the two-doors ' success cemented the firm 's future as an upper tier performance car maker .
New Class four-doors with numbers ending in " 0 " were replaced by the larger BMW 5 Series in 1972 .
The upscale 2000C and 2000CS coupes were replaced by the six-cylinder BMW E9 , introduced in 1969 with the 2800CS.
The 1600 two-door was discontinued in 1975 , and the 2002 was replaced by the 320i in 1975 .
The 1 Series , originally launched in 2004 , is BMW 's smallest car .
Currently available are the second generation hatchback ( F20 ) and first generation coupe/convertible ( E82/E88 ) .
The 3 Series , a compact executive car manufactured since model year 1975 , is currently in its sixth generation ( F30 ) ; models include the sport sedan ( F30 ) , and fourth generation station wagon ( F30 ) , and convertible ( E93 ) , and the Gran Turismo .
In 2014 , the 4 Series will be released and replace the 3 Series Coupe and Convertible .
The 5 Series is a mid-size executive car , available in sedan ( F10 ) and station wagon ( F11 ) forms .
The 5 Series Gran Turismo ( F07 ) , which debuted in 2010 , created a segment between station wagons and crossover SUV.
BMW 's full-size flagship executive sedan is the 7 Series .
Typically , BMW introduces many of their innovations first in the 7 Series , such as the iDrive system .
The 7 Series Hydrogen , having one of the world 's first hydrogen fueled internal combustion engines , is fueled by liquid hydrogen and emits only clean water vapor .
Based on the 5 Series ' platform , the 6 Series is BMW 's grand touring luxury sport coupe/convertible ( F12/F13 ) .
A 2-seater roadster and coupe which succeeded the Z3 , the Z4 has been sold since 2002 .
The X3 ( F25 ) , BMW 's second crossover SUV ( called SAV or " Sports Activity Vehicle " by BMW) debuted in 2010 and replaced the X3 ( E83 ) , which was based on the E46 3 Series ' platform , and had been in production since 2003 .
Marketed in Europe as an off-roader , it benefits from BMW 's xDrive all-wheel drive system .
The all-wheel drive X5 ( E53 ) was BMW 's first crossover SUV ( SAV ) , based on the 5 Series , and is a mid-size luxury SUV ( SAV ) sold by BMW since 2000 .
A 4-seat crossover SUV released by BMW in December 2007 , the X6 is marketed as a " Sports Activity Coupe " ( SAC ) by BMW.
The X1 extends the BMW Sports Activity Series model lineup .
In 2013 , the company announced that it was to launch its first fully electric car range .
This would begin with the launch of the BMW i3 in the second quarter of 2014 .
BMW produce a number of high-performance derivatives of their cars developed by their BMW M GmbH ( previously BMW Motorsport GmbH) subsidiary .
BMW has been engaged in motorsport activities since the dawn of the first BMW motorcycle in 1923 .
BMW has a history of success in Formula One .
In 2006 BMW took over the Sauber team and became Formula One constructors .
In 2007 and 2008 the team enjoyed some success .
The most recent win is a lone constructor team 's victory by BMW Sauber F1 Team , on 8 June 2008 , at the Canadian Grand Prix with Robert Kubica driving .
BMW was an engine supplier to Williams , Benetton , Brabham , and Arrows .
Notable drivers who have started their Formula One careers with BMW include Jenson Button , Juan Pablo Montoya , Robert Kubica and Sebastian Vettel .
In July 2009 , BMW announced that it would withdraw from Formula One at the end of the 2009 season .
The team was sold back to the previous owner , Peter Sauber , who kept the BMW part of the name for the 2010 season due to issues with the Concorde Agreement .
The team has since dropped BMW from their name starting in 2011 .
BMW has a long and successful history in touring car racing .
BMW announced on 15 October 2010 that it will return to touring car racing during the 2012 season .
Dr. Klaus Draeger , director of research and development of the BMW Group , who was in charge of the return to DTM racing ( Deutsche Tourenwagen Masters ) , commented that " The return of BMW to the DTM is a fundamental part of the restructuring of our motorsport activities .
With its increased commitment to production car racing , BMW is returning to its roots .
The race track is the perfect place to demonstrate the impressive sporting characteristics of our vehicles against our core competitors in a high-powered environment .
The DTM is the ideal stage on which to do this . "
In football , BMW sponsors Bundesliga club Eintracht Frankfurt .
It is an official sponsor of the London 2012 olympics providing 4000 BMWs and Minis in a deal made in November 2009 .
The company also made a six-year sponsorship deal with the United States Olympic Committee ( USOC ) in July 2010 .
BMW has sponsored various European golf events such as the PGA Championship at Wentworth , the BMW Italian Open and the BMW International Open in Germany .
The company is a charter member of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 's ( EPA ) National Environmental Achievement Track , which recognizes companies for their environmental stewardship and performance .
It is also a member of the South Carolina Environmental Excellence Program .
In 2012 , BMW was named the world 's most sustainable automotive company for the eighth consecutive year by the Dow Jones Sustainability Indexes .
The BMW Group is the only automotive enterprise in the index since its inception in 1999 .
In 2001 , the BMW Group committed itself to the United Nations Environment Programme , the UN Global Compact and the Cleaner Production Declaration .
It was also the first company in the automotive industry to appoint an environmental officer , in 1973 .
BMW is a member of the World Business Council for Sustainable Development .
BMW is industry leader in the Carbon Disclosure Project 's Global 500 ranking and 3rd place in Carbon Disclosure Leadership Index across all industries .
The BMW Group was rated the most sutainable DAX 30 company by Sustainalytics in 2012 .
BMW has taken measures to reduce the impact the company has on the environment .
It is trying to design less-polluting cars by making existing models more efficient , as well as developing environmentally friendly fuels for future vehicles .
Possibilities include : electric power , hybrid power ( combustion engines and electric motors ) hydrogen engines .
BMW offers 49 models with EU5/6 emissions norm and nearly 20 models with CO2 output less than 140 g/km , which puts it on the lowest tax group and therefore could provide the future owner with eco-bonus offered from some European countries .
However , there have been some criticisms directed at BMW, and in particular , accusations of greenwash in reference to their BMW Hydrogen 7. Some critics claim that the emissions produced during hydrogen fuel production outweigh the reduction of tailpipe emissions , and that the Hydrogen 7 is a distraction from more immediate , practical solutions for car pollution .
BMW has created a range of high-end bicycles sold online and through dealerships .
They range from the Kid 's Bike to the EUR 4,499 Enduro Bike .
In the United States , only the Cruise Bike and Kid 's Bike models are sold .
BMW vehicles follow a certain nomenclature ; usually a 3 digit number is followed by 1 or 2 letters .
The next two numbers traditionally represent the engine displacement in cubic centimeters divided by 100 .
However , more recent cars use those two numbers as a performance index , as e.g . the 116i , 118i and 120i ( all 2,0L gas-powered ) , just like the 325d and 330d ( both 3,0L diesel ) share the same motor block while adjusting engine power through setup and turbocharging .
A similar nomenclature is used by BMW Motorrad for their motorcycles .
The system of letters can be used in combination , and is as follows :
† historic nomenclature indicating "td " refers to " Turbo Diesel" , not a diesel hatchback or touring model ( 524td , 525td )
† † typically includes sport seats , spoiler , aerodynamic body kit , upgraded wheels and Limit Slip Differential on pre-95 model etc .
For example , the BMW 750iL is a fuel-injected 7 Series with a long wheelbase and 5.4 litres of displacement .
This badge was used for successive generations , E65 and F01 , except the "i" and " L" switched places , so it read " Li" instead of "iL" .
L6 , L7 , etc. ) it identifies the vehicle as a special luxury variant , having extended leather and special interior appointments .
The L7 is based on the E23 and E38 , and the L6 is based on the E24 .
When ' X ' is capitalised and supersedes the series number ( e .g .
X3 , X5 , etc. ) it identifies the vehicle as one of BMW 's Sports Activity Vehicles ( SAV ) , their brand of crossovers , with BMW 's xDrive .
The second number in the ' X ' series denotes the platform that it is based upon , for instance the X5 is derived from the 5 Series .
Unlike BMW cars , the SAV 's main badge does not denote engine size ; the engine is instead indicated on side badges .
The ' Z ' identifies the vehicle as a two-seat roadster ( e .g .
'M ' variants of ' Z ' models have the 'M ' as a suffix or prefix , depending on country of sale ( e .g .
Previous X & Z vehicles had 'i ' or 'si' following the engine displacement number ( denoted in litres ) .
BMW is now globally standardising this nomenclature on X & Z vehicles by using 'sDrive ' or 'xDrive ' ( simply meaning rear or all-wheel drive , respectively ) followed by two numbers which vaguely represent the vehicle 's engine ( e .g .
Z4 sDrive35i is a rear-wheel-drive Z4 roadster with a 3.0 L twin-turbo fuel-injected engine ) .
BMW last used the 's ' for the E36 328is , which ceased production in 1999 .
However , the 's ' nomenclature was brought back on the 2011 model year BMW 335is and BMW Z4 sDrive35is .
The 335is is a sport-tuned trim with more performance and an optional dual clutch transmission that slots between the regular 335i and top-of-the-line M3.
The 'M ' – for Motorsport – identifies the vehicle as a high-performance model of a particular series ( e .g .
For example , the M6 is the highest performing vehicle in the 6 Series lineup .
Although 'M ' cars should be separated into their respective series platforms , it is very common to see 'M ' cars grouped together as its own lineup on the official BMW website .
The M version of the BMW 1 Series was named the BMW 1 Series M Coupe rather than the traditional style " M1" due to the possible confusion with BMW 's former BMW M1 homologation sports car .
The M versions of the Sports Activity Vehicles , such as the X5 M , could not follow the regular naming convention since MX5 was used for Mazda 's MX-5 Miata .
For instance in the 2008 model year , the BMW 125i/128i , 328i , and 528i all had 3.0 naturally aspirated engines ( N52 ) , not a 2,500 cc or 2,800 cc engine as the series designation number would lead one to believe .
The '28' is to denote a detuned engine in the 2008 cars , compared to the 2006 model year '30' vehicles ( 330i and 530i ) whose 3.0 naturally aspirated engines are from the same N52 family but had more output .
The 2008 BMW 335i and 535i also have 3.0-litre engine ; however the engines are twin-turbocharged ( N54 ) which is not identified by the nomenclature .
Nonetheless the '35' indicates a more powerful engine than previous '30' models that have the naturally aspirated N52 engine .
The 2011 BMW 740i and 335is shares the same twin-turbo 3.0 engine from the N54 family but tuned to higher outputs , although the badging is not consistent ( '40' and 's ' ) .
The 2013 BMW 640i Gran Coupe 's twin-scroll single turbo 3.0L inline-6 engine makes similar output to the older twin turbo inline-6 engines .
The E36 and E46 323i and E39 523i had 2.5-litre engines .
The E36 318i made after 1996 has a 1.9 L engine ( M44 ) as opposed to the 1.8 L ( M42 ) used in the 1992 to 1995 models .
The E39 540i had a 4.4 L M62 engine , instead of a 4.0 L as the designation would suggest .
The badging for recent V8 engines ( N62 and N63 ) also does not indicate displacement , as the 2006 750i and 2009 750i have 4800 cc ( naturally aspirated ) and 4400 cc ( twin-turbocharged ) engines , respectively .
In June 2011 , BMW and Sixt launched Drivenow , a joint-venture that provides carsharing services in several cities in Europe and North America .
As of December 2012 , DriveNow operates over 1,000 vehicles , which serve five cities worldwide and over 60,000 customers .
From the summer of 2001 until October 2005 , BMW hosted The Hire , showcasing sporty models being driven to extremes .
These videos are still popular within the enthusiast community and proved to be a ground-breaking online advertising campaign .
Annually since 1999 , BMW enthusiasts have met in Santa Barbara , CA to attend Bimmerfest .
One of the largest brand-specific gatherings in the U.S. , over 3,000 people attended in 2006 , and over 1,000 BMW cars were present .
In 2007 , the event was held on 5 May .
The model series are referred to as " Einser " ( " One-er " for 1 series ) , " Dreier " ( " Three-er " for 3 series ) , " Fünfer " ( " Five-er " for the 5 series ) , " Sechser " ( " Six-er " for the 6 series ) , " Siebener " ( " Seven-er " for the 7 series ) .
These are not actually slang , but are the normal way that such letters and numbers are pronounced in German .
The English slang terms Beemer , Bimmer and Bee-em are variously used for BMWs of all kinds , cars and motorcycles .
In the US , specialists have been at pains to prescribe that a distinction must be made between using Beemer exclusively to describe BMW motorcycles , and using Bimmer only to refer to BMW cars , in the manner of a " true aficionado " and avoid appearing to be "uninitiated . "
The Canadian " Globe and Mail " prefers Bimmer and calls Beemer a "yuppie abomination , " while the " Tacoma News Tribune " says it is a distinction made by "auto snobs . "
Using the wrong slang risks offending BMW enthusiasts .
An editor of " Business Week " was satisfied in 2003 that the question was resolved in favor of Bimmer by noting that a Google search yielded 10 times as many hits compared to Beemer .
Manufacturers employ designers for their cars , but BMW has made efforts to gain recognition for exceptional contributions to and support of the arts , including art beyond motor vehicle design .
These efforts typically overlap or complement BMW 's marketing and branding campaigns .
BMW Headquarters designed in 1972 by Karl Schwanzer has become a European icon , and artist Gerhard Richter created his " Red , Yellow , Blue " series of paintings for the building 's lobby .
In 1975 , Alexander Calder was commissioned to paint the 3.0CSL driven by Hervé Poulain at the 24 Hours of Le Mans .
This led to more BMW Art Cars , painted by artists including David Hockney , Jenny Holzer , Roy Lichtenstein , and others .
The cars , currently numbering 17 , have been shown at the Louvre , Guggenheim Museum Bilbao , and , in 2009 , at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art and New York 's Grand Central Terminal .
BMW was the principal sponsor of the 1998 " The Art of the Motorcycle " exhibition at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum and other Guggenheim museums , though the financial relationship between BMW and the Guggenheim was criticised in many quarters .
In 2012 , BMW brought out the BMW Art Guide by Independent Collectors , which had , amongst others , the Dikeou Collection .
It is the first global guide to private and publicly accessible collections of contemporary art world wide .
The 2006 " BMW Performance Series " was a marketing event geared to attract black car buyers , and included the " BMW Pop-Jazz Live Series , " a tour headlined by jazz musician Mike Phillips , and the " BMW Blackfilms.com
BMW has garnered a reputation over the years for its April Fools pranks , which are printed in the British press every year .
In 2010 , they ran an advert announcing that customers would be able to order BMWs with different coloured badges to show their affiliation with the political party they supported .
In October 2008 , BMW Group Canada was named one of Greater Toronto 's Top Employers by Mediacorp Canada Inc. , which was announced by the Toronto Star newspaper .
Signing a deal in 2003 for the production of sedans in China , May 2004 saw the opening of a factory in the North-eastern city of Shenyang where Brilliance Auto produces BMW-branded automobiles in a joint venture with the German company .
Bavarian Auto Group is a multinational group of companies established in March 2003 when it was appointed as the sole importer of BMW and Mini in Egypt , with monopoly rights for import , assembly , distribution , sales and after-sales support of BMW products in Egypt .
Since that date , BAG invested a total amount of US$ 100 million distributed on seven companies and 11 premises in addition to three stores .
BMW India was established in 2006 as a sales subsidiary in Gurgaon ( National Capital Region ) .
A state-of-the-art assembly plant for BMW 3 and 5 Series started operation in early 2007 in Chennai .
Construction of the plant started in January 2006 with an initial investment of more than one billion Indian Rupees .
The plant started operation in the first quarter of 2007 and produces the different variants of BMW 3 Series , BMW 5 Series , BMW 7 Series , BMW X1 , BMW X3 , Mini Cooper S , Mini Cooper D and Mini Countryman .
Yanase Co. , Ltd. is the exclusive retailer of all imported BMW ( passenger cars and motorcycles ) products to Japanese consumers , and has had the exclusive rights to do so since the end of World War II .
BMWs have been assembled in South Africa since 1968 , when Praetor Monteerders ' plant was opened in Rosslyn , near Pretoria .
BMW initially bought shares in the company , before fully acquiring it in 1975 ; in so doing , the company became BMW South Africa , the first wholly owned subsidiary of BMW to be established outside Germany .
Three unique models that BMW Motorsport created for the South African market were the E23 M745i ( 1983 ) , which used the M88 engine from the BMW M1 , the BMW 333i ( 1986 ) , which added a six-cylinder 3.2-litre M30 engine to the E30 , and the E30 BMW 325is ( 1989 ) which was powered by an Alpina-derived 2.7-litre engine .
Unlike U.S. manufacturers , such as Ford and GM , which divested from the country in the 1980s , BMW retained full ownership of its operations in South Africa .
Following the end of apartheid in 1994 , and the lowering of import tariffs , BMW South Africa ended local production of the 5-Series and 7-Series , in order to concentrate on production of the 3-Series for the export market .
South African–built BMWs are now exported to right hand drive markets including Japan , Australia , New Zealand , the United Kingdom , Indonesia , Malaysia , Singapore , and Hong Kong , as well as Sub-Saharan Africa .
Since 1997 , BMW South Africa has produced vehicles in left-hand drive for export to Taiwan , the United States and Iran , as well as South America .
BMWs with a VIN starting with "NC0 " are manufactured in South Africa .
The BMW Manufacturing Company opened in 1994 and has been manufacturing all Z4 and X5 models , and more recently the X6 and X3 , including those for export to Europe , on the same assembly line in Greer near Spartanburg , South Carolina , USA .
In an average work day the company builds 600 vehicles : 500 X5s and 100 Z4s .
The engines for these vehicles are built in Munich , Germany .
BMWs with a VIN starting with "4US and 5US" are manufactured at Spartanburg .
In 2010 BMW announced that it would spend $ 750 million to expand operations at the Greer plant .
This expansion will allow production of 240,000 vehicles a year and will make the plant the largest car factory in the United States by number of employees .
Currently , the facility produces all BMW X3 , X5 and X6 models .
The X4 , which will be launched in 2014 , will also be produced in Spartanburg .
In 2013 , BMW replaced the 'double-gong ' sound used in TV and Radio advertising campaign since 1998 with to represent the future identity of BMW, which was described as "introduced by a rising , resonant sound and underscored by two distinctive bass tones that form the sound logo 's melodic and rhythmic basis . "
The new sound was first used in BMW 4 Series Concept Coupe TV commercial .
The sound was produced by Thomas Kisser of HASTINGS media music .
The circular blue and white BMW logo or roundel evolved from the circular Rapp Motorenwerke company logo , from which the BMW company grew , combined with the blue and white colors of the flag of Bavaria .
The logo has been portrayed as the movement of an aircraft propeller with the white blades cutting through a blue sky—first used in a BMW advertisement in 1929 , twelve years after the roundel was created—but this is not the origin of the logo itself .
In 2012 , BMW vehicles were stolen by programming a blank key fob to start the car through the on-board diagnostics ( OBD ) connection .
The primary causes of this vulnerability lie in the lack of appropriate authentication and authorization in the OBD specifications , which rely largely on security through obscurity .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Statistics play an important role in summarizing baseball performance and evaluating players in the sport .
Since the flow of a baseball game has natural breaks to it , and normally players act individually rather than performing in clusters , the sport lends itself to easy record-keeping and statistics .
Statistics have been kept for professional baseball since the creation of the National League and American League , now part of Major League Baseball .
Many statistics are also available from outside of Major League Baseball , from leagues such as the National Association of Professional Base Ball Players and the Negro Leagues .
The practice of keeping records of player achievements was started in the 19th century by Henry Chadwick .
Based on his experience with the sport called cricket , Chadwick devised the predecessors to modern day statistics including batting average , runs scored , and runs allowed .
Traditionally , statistics such as batting average ( the number of hits divided by the number of at bats ) and earned run average ( the average number of earned runs allowed by a pitcher per nine innings ) have dominated attention in the statistical world of baseball .
However , the recent advent of sabermetrics has created statistics drawing from a greater breadth of player performance measures and playing field variables .
Sabermetrics and comparative statistics attempt to provide an improved measure of a player 's performance and contributions to his team from year to year , frequently against a statistical performance average .
Comprehensive , historical baseball statistics were difficult for the average fan to access until 1951 , when researcher Hy Turkin published " The Complete Encyclopedia of Baseball" .
In 1969 , Macmillan Publishing printed its first " Baseball Encyclopedia" , using a computer to compile statistics for the first time .
Known as " Big Mac" , the encyclopedia became the standard baseball reference until 1988 , when " Total Baseball " was released by Warner Books using more sophisticated technology .
The publication of " Total Baseball " led to the discovery of several "phantom ballplayers " , such as Lou Proctor , who did not belong in official record books and were removed .
Throughout modern baseball , a few core statistics have been traditionally referenced – batting average , RBI , and home runs .
To this day , a player who leads the league in all of these three statistics earns the " Triple Crown . "
For pitchers , wins , ERA , and strikeouts are the most often-cited statistics , and a pitcher leading his league in these statistics may also be referred to as a " Triple Crown " winner .
General managers and baseball scouts have long used the major statistics , among other factors and opinions , to understand player value .
Managers , catchers and pitchers use the statistics of batters of opposing teams to develop pitching strategies and set defensive positioning on the field .
Managers and batters study opposing pitcher performance and motions in attempting to improve hitting .
Some sabermetric statistics have entered the mainstream baseball world that measure a batter 's overall performance including on-base plus slugging , commonly referred to as OPS.
OPS adds the hitter 's on-base percentage ( number of times reached base by any means divided by total plate appearances ) to his slugging percentage ( total bases divided by at-bats ) .
Some argue that the OPS formula is flawed and that more weight should be shifted towards OBP (on-base percentage ) .
The statistic wOBA ( weighted on-base average ) attempts to correct for this .
OPS is also useful when determining a pitcher 's level of success .
" Opponent On-base Plus Slugging " ( OOPS) is becoming a popular tool to evaluate a pitcher 's actual performance .
When analyzing a pitcher 's statistics , some useful categories to consider include K/9IP ( strikeouts per nine innings ) , K/BB ( strikeouts per walk ) , HR/9 ( Home runs per nine innings ) , WHIP ( walks plus hits per inning pitched ) and OOPS ( opponent on-base plus slugging ) .
However , since 2001 , more emphasis has been placed on Defense-Independent Pitching Statistics , including Defense-Independent ERA (dERA ) , in an attempt to evaluate a pitcher 's performance regardless of the strength of the defensive players behind him .
All of the above statistics may be used in certain game situations .
For example , a certain hitter 's ability to hit left-handed pitchers might incline a manager to increase his opportunities to face left-handed pitchers .
Other hitters may have a history of success against a given pitcher ( or vice versa ) , and the manager may use this information to create a favorable
Broadcast commentators often refer to this as "playing the percentages " .
Most of these terms also apply to softball .
Commonly used statistics with their abbreviations are explained here .
The explanations below are for quick reference and do not fully or completely define the statistic ; for the strict definition , see the linked article for each statistic .
It is difficult to determine quantitatively what is considered to be a "good " value in a certain statistical category , and qualitative assessments may lead to arguments .
Using full-season statistics available at the Official Site of Major League Baseball for the 2004 through 2011 seasons , the following tables show top ranges in various statistics , in alphabetical order .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Barb Wire was a superhero published by Comics Greatest World , an imprint of Dark Horse Comics .
A regular series was published for 9 issues between 1994-1995 , followed by a mini-series in 1998 .
1–4 : Chris Warner , script and pencils/Tim Bradstreet , inks .
In Steel Harbor , a bombed-out wreck of a town , thrill-junkie Barbara Kopetski - better known as " Barb Wire " - is a bar owner and part-time bounty hunter ( in order to pay for her bar , The Hammerhead ) .
She is skilled in many areas , but excels in combat-related abilities .
While she has a brother and several allies , she is essentially a loner , although this is something which is uncomfortable for her to think about .
The movie adaptation was released in 1996 starring Pamela Anderson as Barb Wire .
The film , panned by critics and fans alike , was nominated for the Razzie Award for Worst Picture , but lost to the Demi Moore film " Striptease " .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Michael Bruce Sterling ( born April 14 , 1954 ) is an American science fiction author who is best known for his novels and his work on the " Mirrorshades " anthology .
This work helped to define the cyberpunk genre .
Sterling , along with William Gibson , Rudy Rucker , John Shirley , Lewis Shiner , and Pat Cadigan , is one of the founders of the cyberpunk movement in science fiction .
In addition , he is one of the sub-genre 's chief ideological promulgators .
This has earned him the nickname " Chairman Bruce . "
He was also one of the first organizers of the Turkey City Writer 's Workshop , and is a frequent attendee at the Sycamore Hill Writer 's Workshop .
He won Hugo Awards for his novelettes " Bicycle Repairman " and " Taklamakan " .
His first novel , " Involution Ocean" , published in 1977 , features the world , " Nullaqua " where all the atmosphere is contained in a single , miles-deep crater .
The story concerns a ship sailing on the ocean of dust at the bottom , which hunts creatures called dustwhales that live beneath the surface .
It is partially a science-fictional pastiche of " Moby-Dick " by Herman Melville .
From the late 1970s onwards , Sterling wrote a series of stories set in the Shaper/Mechanist universe : the solar system is colonised , with two major warring factions .
The Mechanists use a great deal of computer-based mechanical technologies ; the Shapers do genetic engineering on a massive scale .
The situation is complicated by the eventual contact with alien civilizations ; humanity eventually splits into many subspecies , with the implication that many of these effectively vanish from the galaxy , reminiscent of The Singularity in the works of Vernor Vinge .
The Shaper/Mechanist stories can be found in the collection " Crystal Express " and the collection " Schismatrix Plus" , which contains the original novel " Schismatrix " and all of the stories set in the Shaper/Mechanist universe .
Alastair Reynolds identified " Schismatrix " and the other Shaper/Mechanist stories as one of the greatest influences on his own work .
In the 1980s , Sterling edited the science fiction critical fanzine Cheap Truth , under the alias of Vincent Omniaveritas .
He wrote a column called " Catscan" , for the now-defunct science fiction critical magazine , " SF Eye" .
He recently contributed a chapter to " Sound Unbound : Sampling Digital Music and Culture " ( The MIT Press , 2008 ) edited by Paul D. Miller a.k .a .
He also contributed , along with Lewis Shiner , to the short story " Mozart in Mirrorshades " .
From April 2009 through May 2009 , he was an editor at Cool Tools .
Since October 2003 Sterling has blogged at " Beyond the Beyond" , which is hosted by " Wired " .
His most recent novel ( as of 2013 ) is " Love Is Strange " ( December 2012 ) , a Paranormal Romance ( 40k ) .
He has been the instigator of three projects which can be found on the Web -
Sterling has a habit of coining neologisms to describe things which he believes will be common in the future , especially items which already exist in limited numbers .
In childhood , Sterling spent several years in India ; today he has a notable fondness for Bollywood films .
In 2003 he was appointed Professor at the European Graduate School where he is teaching summer intensive courses on media and design .
In 2005 , he became "visionary in residence " at Art Center College of Design in Pasadena , California .
He lived in Belgrade with Serbian author and film-maker Jasmina Tešanović for several years .
In September 2007 he moved to Turin , Italy .
He also travels the world extensively giving speeches and attending conferences .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
The 2001 World Series , the 97th edition of Major League Baseball 's championship series , took place between the Arizona Diamondbacks of the National League and the New York Yankees of the American League .
The Diamondbacks won the best-of-seven series four games to three .
The series was deemed by the dramatics as one of the greatest of all time and was one of the most memorable since it featured two extra-inning games and three late-inning comebacks .
It ended on a Game 7 walk-off hit in the form of a bases loaded bloop single off the bat of Luis Gonzalez .
This was the third World Series to end in this way after and .
This was the first World Series ever played in the state of Arizona and the Mountain Time Zone .
With the All-Star Game format change in 2003 , the World Series would not open in the city of the National League champion again until .
This was the last World Series not to feature a wild card team until .
This was also the first World Series to end in November .
With the win by the Diamondbacks , the franchise became the first World Series champion from a Far West state other than California .
Randy Johnson and Curt Schilling were the co-MVPs of the 2001 World Series , combining for a 4–0 record and a 1.40 ERA and striking out 45 Yankees in innings .
The Arizona Diamondbacks reached the Series in just their fourth season , breaking a record previously held by the Florida Marlins , and took on the three-time defending champion New York Yankees , who had won the World Series in four of the last five years and tried to become the first team to win four straight titles since the Yankees ' five consecutive titles from to .
Arizona captured the best of seven games Series , four games to three , thereby dethroning the defending World Champions and earning their first title .
Arizona won the first two games at home handily , but New York won the next three in close contests at the Yankee Stadium , including two dramatic ninth-inning comebacks against Arizona closer Byung-Hyun Kim .
Arizona won the sixth game handily with Randy Johnson pitching a masterful game .
Randy pitched in relief of Curt Schilling in Game 7. The Diamondbacks won that game by the score of 3–2 , ending when Jay Bell scored the winning run on a bloop single by Luis Gonzalez , in the bottom of the ninth inning off the Yankees ' ace closer , Mariano Rivera .
Johnson , credited with the Game 7 win , became the first pitcher ever to win three games in the same World Series since Detroit Tigers ' Mickey Lolich in .
The home team won every game in the Series .
This had only happened twice before , in and also in domed ballparks ; in the two earlier championships , the Minnesota Twins won the Series .
This Series was the subject of an HBO documentary " Nine Innings from Ground Zero " in 2004 .
Though the series was played to the maximum seven games , the Diamondbacks outscored the Yankees 37–14 as a result of large margins of victory achieved by Arizona in Bank One Ballpark relative to the one run margins the Yankees achieved at Yankee Stadium .
batting average , the lowest ever in a seven-game World Series .
by the St . Louis Cardinals in the 1985 World Series when they lost to the Kansas City Royals .
Due to the postponement of MLB games as a result of the September 11 attacks , the World Series began Saturday , October 27 , 2001 , the latest start date ever for a World Series until the 2009 World Series , which started on October 28 .
The last three games were the first major-league games ( other than exhibitions ) played in the month of November .
This was just the fourth time that no World Series champion was decided within the traditional month of October .
The previous three occurrences were in ( no series ) , ( series held in September due to World War I ) , and ( no series due to work stoppage ) .
Additionally , the Series took place in New York City only seven weeks after the attacks , representing a remarkable boost in morale for the fatigued city .
Saturday , October 27 , 2001 at Bank One Ballpark in Phoenix , Arizona
The Arizona hitters chased Yankees starter Mike Mussina after three innings .
The Yankees gave up five runs and the Diamondbacks rode Curt Schilling 's seven strong innings to a 9–1 rout .
Craig Counsell homered off Mussina in the first and Luis Gonzalez hit a two-run home run in the third and scored twice .
The Yankees scored one run on one hit in the first , and were able to get two other hits before being held hitless after the fourth inning .
Sunday , October 28 , 2001 at Bank One Ballpark in Phoenix , Arizona
Arizona continued to take control of the Series with the strong pitching performance of Randy Johnson .
The Big Unit pitched a complete game shutout , allowing only four baserunners and three hits while striking out eleven Yankees .
Matt Williams hit a three-run homer in the seventh off Yankee starter Andy Pettitte as Arizona won Game 2 , 4–0 and led the series two games to none lead as the Series moved to New York City .
Tuesday , October 30 , 2001 at Yankee Stadium ( I ) in Bronx , New York
The game was opened in New York by United States President George W. Bush , who threw the ceremonial first pitch , a strike to Yankees backup catcher Todd Greene .
Bush became the first sitting US President to throw a World Series first pitch since Dwight D. Eisenhower in .
He also threw the baseball from the mound where the pitcher would be set (unlike most ceremonial first pitches which are from in front of the mound ) and threw it for a strike .
Yankees starter Roger Clemens allowed only three hits and struck out nine in seven innings of work .
Yankees closer Mariano Rivera pitched two innings for the save .
Scott Brosius broke a sixth inning tie with a run scoring RBI single to left field .
Wednesday , October 31 , 2001 at Yankee Stadium ( I ) in Bronx , New York
Arizona manager Bob Brenly gambled and started Curt Schilling on three days ' rest .
It was a good decision as Schilling pitched seven strong innings , allowing just one run , Shane Spencer 's solo homer in the third , and three hits .
Yankees ' Orlando Hernandez pitched solid innings , but gave up a game-tying upper deck home run to Mark Grace in the fourth .
The Diamondbacks took a 3–1 lead in the top of the eighth on an Erubiel Durazo double and a fielder 's choice , which prompted Brenly to bring in closer Byung-Hyun Kim for a two inning save .
Kim , at 22 , became the first Korean-born player ever to play in the MLB World Series .
Kim struck out the side in the eighth , but the Yankees began their comeback in the bottom of the ninth inning .
First , Jeter tried bunting , but was thrown out by one step .
Then Paul O'Neill lined an opposite-field single in front of left fielder Luis Gonzalez .
After Bernie Williams struck out , Tino Martinez hit a two-run home run on the first pitch he saw from Kim over the right-center field wall , tying the game 3–3 .
Brenly stuck with his closer as the game headed into extra innings .
When the scoreboard clock in Yankee Stadium passed midnight , World Series play in November began , with the message on the scoreboard " Welcome to November Baseball" .
hit an opposite field walk-off home run on a 3–2 pitch count from Kim .
This walk-off home run gave the Yankees a 4–3 victory and tied the Series at two games apiece , making Jeter the first player to hit a November home run and earning him the tongue-in-cheek nickname of " Mr.
Thursday , November 1 , 2001 at Yankee Stadium ( I ) in Bronx , New York
For Game 5 , Brenly started Miguel Batista , who pitched a strong scoreless innings .
Mussina bounced back from his poor Game 1 start , but allowed solo home runs to Steve Finley and Rod Barajas in the fifth .
With the Diamondbacks leading 2–0 in the ninth , Brenly again went to his closer , and for the second night in a row Byung-Hyun Kim failed to hold the lead .
Jorge Posada doubled to open the inning , but Kim retired the next two batters .
Then , with two outs in the ninth Scott Brosius hit a 1–0 pitch over the left field wall to tie the game at two .
Yankee Stadium erupted after the Brosius home run .
For the second straight night , the game went into extra innings following a ninth-inning home run and the Yankees won it in the twelfth when Alfonso Soriano knocked in Chuck Knoblauch with a base hit off Albie Lopez .
New York went ahead three games to two in the series as the teams headed back to Arizona .
In the top of the ninth inning , with the Yankees down 2–0 , Paul O'Neill ( retiring after the series ) was serenaded by Yankees fans chanting his name in unison .
Saturday , November 3 , 2001 at Bank One Ballpark in Phoenix , Arizona
With Arizona in a must-win situation , Johnson pitched seven innings and struck out seven , giving up just two runs .
The Diamondbacks rocked Yankees starter Andy Pettitte for six runs after two innings and nine more runs against reliever Jay Witasick in one and a third innings before Randy Choate and Mike Stanton kept them scoreless for the rest of the game .
The Diamondbacks hit six doubles and Danny Bautista batted 3-for-4 with five RBIs .
The team set a World Series record with 22 hits and defeated the New York Yankees in its most lopsided postseason loss in 293 postseason games .
The 15–2 win evened the series at three games apiece and set up a Game 7 for the ages between Roger Clemens and Curt Schilling , again pitching on three days ' rest .
Sunday , November 4 , 2001 at Bank One Ballpark in Phoenix , Arizona
It was a matchup of two twenty-game winners in the Series finale that would crown a new champion .
Clemens at 39 years old became the oldest Game 7 starter ever .
Schilling had already started two games of the Series and pitched his 300th inning of the season on just three days ' rest .
The two aces matched each other inning by inning and after seven full innings , the game was tied at 1–1 .
The Diamondbacks scored first in the sixth inning with a Steve Finley single and a Danny Bautista double ( Bautista would be called out at third base ) .
The Yankees responded with an RBI single from Tino Martinez , which drove in Derek Jeter .
Brenly stayed with Schilling into the eighth , and the move backfired as Alfonso Soriano hit a solo home run on an 0–2 pitch .
After Schilling got one out , he gave up a single to David Justice , and he left the game trailing 2–1 .
Brenly brought in Miguel Batista to get out Derek Jeter and then in an unconventional move , brought in the previous night 's starter Randy Johnson , who had thrown 104 pitches , in relief to keep it a one-run game .
It proved to be a smart move , as Johnson retired all four Yankees he faced .
With the Yankees ahead 2–1 in the bottom of the eighth , manager Joe Torre turned the game over to his ace closer Mariano Rivera for a two-inning save .
Rivera struck out the side in the eighth , including Arizona 's Luis Gonzalez , Matt Williams , and Danny Bautista , which lowered his ERA in the postseason to a major league-best of 0.70 .
Although he was effective in the eighth , this game would end in the third ninth-inning comeback of the Series .
Mark Grace led off the inning with a single to center on a 1–0 pitch .
Rivera 's errant throw to second base on a bunt attempt by Damian Miller on an 0–1 pitch put runners on first and second .
Derek Jeter tried to reach for the ball , but got tangled in the legs of pinch-runner David Dellucci , who was sliding in an attempt to break up the double play .
Rivera appeared to regain control when he fielded Jay Bell 's bunt and threw out Dellucci at third base , but third baseman Scott Brosius decided to hold onto the baseball instead of throwing to first to complete the double play .
Midre Cummings was sent in to pinch-run for Damien Miller .
With Cummings at second and Bell at first , the next batter , Tony Womack , hit a double down the right-field line on a 2–2 pitch that tied the game and earned Rivera a blown save .
Bell advanced to third and the Yankees pulled the infield and outfield in as the potential winning run stood at third with fewer than two outs .
After Rivera hit Craig Counsell with an 0–1 pitch , the bases were loaded .
On an 0–1 pitch , Luis Gonzalez lofted a soft single over the drawn-in Derek Jeter that barely reached the outfield grass , plating Jay Bell with the winning run .
This ended New York 's bid for a fourth consecutive title and brought Arizona its first championship within its fourth year of existence , making the Diamondbacks the fastest expansion team to win a World Series , as well as the first major professional sports championship for the state of Arizona .
In 2009 , Game 7 was chosen by " Sports Illustrated " as the Best Postseason Game of the Decade ( 2000–2009 ) .
2001 World Series ( 4–3 ) : Arizona Diamondbacks ( N.L. ) over New York Yankees ( A.L. )
For the second consecutive year , Fox carried the World Series over its network with its top broadcast team , Joe Buck and Tim McCarver ( himself a Yankees broadcaster ) .
This was the first year of Fox 's exclusive rights to the World Series ( in the previous contract , Fox only broadcast the World Series in even numbered years while NBC broadcast it in odd numbered years ) , which it has held ever since ( this particular contract also had given Fox exclusive rights to the entire baseball postseason , which aired over its family of networks ; the contract was modified following Disney 's purchase of Fox Family Channel shortly after the World Series ended , as ESPN regained their postseason rights following a year of postseason games on ABC Family , Fox Family 's successor ) .
ESPN Radio provided national radio coverage for the fourth consecutive year , with Jon Miller and Joe Morgan calling the action .
Locally , the Series was carried over KTAR in the Phoenix area and WABC in New York .
Greg Schulte called play-by-play for the Diamondbacks while John Sterling and Michael Kay alternated duties on the Yankees coverage .
This would be Sterling and Kay 's last World Series working together , and Game 7 would be the last Yankee broadcast on WABC .
Kay moved to television and the new YES Network the following season and WCBS picked up radio rights to the Yankees .
It was Kay who announced Derek Jeter 's game-winning home run in Game 4 of the series and subsequently anointed him as " Mr.
After the Yankees lost the World Series , several players moved onto other teams or retired , the most notable changes being the signing of Jason Giambi to replace Martinez , and the retirements of Brosius and O'Neil .
Martinez would later finish his career with the Yankees in 2005 after spending the previous three years in St . Louis and Tampa Bay .
The Yankees would lose the 2003 World Series to the Florida Marlins and would n't win another World Series until 2009 , when they defeated the defending champions , the Philadelphia Phillies , in six games .
After winning the NL West again in 2002 the Diamondbacks were swept 3–0 by St . Louis in the NLDS.
From here they declined , losing 111 games in 2004 as Bob Brenly was fired during that season .
Arizona would not win another NL West title until 2007 .
Schilling was traded to the Boston Red Sox after the 2003 season and in 2004 helped lead them to their first world championship since 1918 .
He helped them win another championship in 2007 and retired after four years with Boston , missing the entire 2008 season with a shoulder injury .
Johnson was traded to the Yankees after the 2004 season , a season that saw him throw a perfect game against the Atlanta Braves , though he would be traded back to the Diamondbacks two years later and finish his career with the San Francisco Giants in 2009 .
Three Diamondbacks from 2001 are still active , Rod Barajas ( now with the Pittsburgh Pirates ) , Miguel Batista ( who last pitched with the New York Mets in 2012 ) , and Lyle Overbay ( rejoined the Diamondbacks in August 2011 ) .
All these players have since played with the Toronto Blue Jays ; Barajas and Overbay at the same time ( 2008 and 2009 ) .
Only Derek Jeter and Alfonso Soriano remain from the 2001 AL champion Yankees .
From 2004 through 2007 , the Yankees ' misfortune in the postseason continued , with the team losing the ALCS to the Boston Red Sox in 2004 , the ALDS to Anaheim in 2005 , the ALDS to Detroit in 2006 , and the ALDS to Cleveland in 2007 .
Joe Torre 's contract was allowed to expire and he was replaced by Joe Girardi in 2008 , a season in which the Yankees would miss the playoffs for the first time since 1993 .
Buster Olney , who covered the Yankees for the " New York Times " before joining ESPN , would write a book titled " The Last Night of the Yankee Dynasty" .
The book is a play by play account of Game 7 in addition to stories about key players , executives , and moments from the 1996–2001 dynasty .
In a 2005 reprinting , Olney included a new epilogue covering the aftermath of the 2001 World Series up to the Boston Red Sox epic comeback from down 3–0 in the 2004 ALCS.
, this is the state of Arizona 's only world championship among the four major professional sports .
On October 11 , 2005 A&E Home Video released the New York Yankees Fall Classic Collectors Edition ( 1996–2001 ) DVD set .
Game 4 of the 2001 World Series is included in the set .
On April 29 , 2008 The Arizona Diamondbacks 2001 World Series DVD set was released .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
The British and Irish Lions , formerly known as the British Lions , is a rugby union team selected from players eligible for any of the Home Unions – the national sides of England , Ireland , Scotland and Wales .
The " Lions " are a Test side , and generally select international players , but they can pick uncapped players available to any one of the four unions .
The side tours every four years , with these rotating among Australia , New Zealand , and South Africa .
The 2009 Test series was lost 2–1 to South Africa , while the 2013 Test series was won 2–1 over Australia .
From 1888 onwards combined rugby sides from the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland toured the Southern Hemisphere .
The first tour was a commercial venture , and was undertaken without official backing .
The six subsequent visits enjoyed a growing degree of support from the authorities , before the 1910 South Africa tour , which was the first tour representative of the four Home Unions .
In 1949 the four Home Unions formally created a Tours Committee and for the first time , every player of the 1950 Lions squad had played internationally before the tour .
The 1950s tours saw high win rates in provincial games , but the Test series were typically lost or drawn .
The winning series in 1971 ( New Zealand ) and 1974 ( South Africa ) changed this pattern .
The last tour of the amateur age took place in 1993 .
The multi-nation team that is today named the British and Irish Lions first came into existence in 1888 as the Shaw & Shrewsbury Team .
It was then primarily English in composition but also contained players from Scotland and Wales .
Later the name British Isles became associated with the team .
On their 1950 tour of New Zealand and Australia they officially adopted the name British Lions , the nickname first used by British and South African journalists on the 1924 South African tour after the lion emblem on their ties , the emblem on their jerseys having been dropped in favour of the four-quartered badge with the symbols of the four represented unions .
When the team first emerged in the nineteenth century , it represented the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland , then one single state .
The team continued to exist after the Irish War of Independence and the subsequent division of the island of Ireland in 1922 into the Irish Free State ( later the Republic of Ireland ) and Northern Ireland .
To avoid ambiguity and possible offence to Irish players , it was later decided to define the team 's identity as representing the two sovereign states – Ireland and the United Kingdom – with the team members being either " British " or " Irish" .
From the 2001 tour of Australia , the official name British and Irish Lions has been used .
The team is often referred to simply as the Lions .
As the Lions represent two nation-states , they do not have a national anthem .
For the 2005 tour to New Zealand , the Lions management commissioned a song , " The Power of Four" , although it met with little support amongst Lions fans at the matches and was not used on the 2009 or 2013 Tours .
For more than half a century , the Lions have been synonymous with the red jersey that sports the amalgamated crests of the four unions .
However , prior to 1950 the strip went through a number of significantly different formats .
In 1888 , the promoter of the first expedition to Australia and New Zealand , Arthur Shrewsbury , demanded " something that would be good material and yet take them by storm out here " .
The result was a jersey in thick red , white and blue hoops , worn above white shorts and dark socks .
The tours to South Africa in 1891 and 1896 retained the red , white and blue theme but this time as red and white hooped jerseys and dark blue shorts and socks .
The 1899 trip to Australia saw a reversion to red , white and blue jerseys , but with the blue used in thick hoops and the red and white in thin bands .
The shorts remained blue , as did the socks although a white flash was added to the latter .
The one-off test in 1999 between England and Australia that was played to commemorate Australia 's first test against Reverend Matthew Mullineux 's British side saw England wear an updated version of this jersey .
In 1903 , the South Africa tour followed on from the 1896 tour , with red and white hooped jerseys .
The slight differences were that the red hoops were slightly thicker than the white ( the opposite was true in 1896 ) , and the white flash on the socks introduced in 1899 was partially retained .
The Australia of 1904 saw exactly the same kit as in 1899 , and it seemed that the British touring sides had settled on kits particular to the host destination .
However , in 1908 with the Scottish and Irish unions refusing to be involved , the Anglo-Welsh side only sported red jerseys with a thick white band on their jerseys on tour to Australia and New Zealand .
Blue shorts were retained , but the socks were for the first time red , with a white flash .
Blue jerseys , the Lions named and the crest adopted .
The Scots were once again involved in Dr Tom Smyth 's 1910 team to South Africa .
Thus , dark blue jerseys , were introduced with white shorts and the red socks of 1908 .
The jerseys also had a single lion-rampant crest .
The 1924 tour returned to South Africa , retaining the blue jerseys but now with shorts to match .
It is the 1924 tour that is credited as being the first in which the team were referred to as " the Lions " , the irony being that it was on this tour that the single lion-rampant crest was replaced with the forerunner of the four-quartered badge with the symbols of the four represented unions , that is still worn today .
Although the lion had been dropped from the jersey , the players had worn the lion motif on their ties as they arrived in South Africa , which led the press and public referring to them as " the Lions " .
The unofficial 1927 Argentina tour used the same kit and badge .
So powerful was the attribution of " the Lions " nickname that three heraldic versions of the animal returned as the jersey badge in 1930 .
This was the tour to New Zealand where the tourists now standard blue jerseys caused some controversy .
The convention in rugby is for the home side to accommodate its guests when there is a clash of kit .
The New Zealand side , by then already synonymous with the appellation " All Blacks " , had an all black kit that clashed with the Lions ' blue .
After much reluctance and debate New Zealand agreed to change for the Tests and the All Blacks became the All Whites for the first time .
On the 1930 tour a delegation led by the Irish lock George Beamish expressed their displeasure at the fact that whilst the blue of Scotland , white of England and red of Wales were represented in the strip there was no green for Ireland .
A green flash was added to the socks , which from 1938 became a green turnover ( although on blue socks thus eliminating red from the kit ) , and that has remained a feature of the strip ever since .
In 1936 , the four-quartered badge returned for the tour to Argentina and has remained on the kits ever since , but other than that the strip remained the same .
The adoption of the red jersey happened in the 1950 tour .
A return to New Zealand was accompanied by a desire to avoid the controversy of 1930 and so red replaced blue for the jersey with the resultant kit being that which is still worn today , the combination of red jersey , white shorts and green and blue socks , representing the four unions .
The only additions to the strip since 1950 began appearing in 1993 , with the addition of kit suppliers logos in prominent positions .
Umbro had in 1989 asked for "maximum brand exposure whenever possible " but this did not affect the kit 's appearance .
Since then , Nike then Adidas have had more overt branding on the shirts , with sponsors Scottish Provident ( 1997 ) , ( 2001 ) , Zurich ( 2005 ) and HSBC ( 2009 & 2013 ) .
The earliest tours date back to 1888 , when a 21-man squad visited Australia and New Zealand .
The squad drew players from England , Scotland and Wales , though English players predominated .
The 35-match tour of two host nations included no tests , but the side played provincial , city and academic sides , winning 27 matches .
They played 19 games of Australian rules football , against prominent clubs in Victoria and South Australia , winning six and drawing one of these ( see Australian rules football in England ) .
The first tour , although unsanctioned by rugby bodies , established the concept of Northern Hemisphere sporting sides touring to the Southern Hemisphere .
Three years after the first tour , the Western Province union invited rugby bodies in Britain to tour South Africa .
Some saw the 1891 team — the first sanctioned by the Rugby Football Union — as the English national team , though others referred to it as " the British Isles " .
The tourists played a total of twenty matches , three of them tests .
The team also played the regional side of South Africa ( South Africa did not exist as a political unit in 1891 ) , winning all three matches .
In a notable event of the tour , the touring side presented the Currie Cup to Griqualand West , the province they thought produced the best performance on the tour .
Five years later a British Isles side returned to South Africa .
They played one extra match on this tour , making the total of 21 games , including four tests against South Africa , with the British Isles winning three of them .
The squad had a notable Irish orientation , with the Irish national team contributing six players to the 21-man squad .
In 1899 the British Isles touring side returned to Australia for the first time since the unofficial tour of 1888 .
The squad of 23 for the first time ever had players from each of the home nations .
The team again participated in 21 matches , playing state teams as well as northern Queensland sides and Victorian teams .
A four-test series took place against Australia , the tourists winning three out of the four .
The team returned via Hawaii and Canada playing additional games on route .
Four years later , in 1903 , the British and Irish team returned to South Africa .
The opening performance of the side proved disappointing from the tourists ' point of view , with defeats in its opening three matches by Western Province sides in Cape Town .
From then on the team experienced mixed results , though more wins than losses .
The side lost the test series to South Africa , drawing twice , but with the South Africans winning the decider 8 to nil .
No more than twelve months passed before the British and Irish team ventured to Australia and New Zealand in 1904 .
The tourists devastated the Australian teams , winning every single game .
Australia also lost all three tests to the visitors , even getting held to a standstill in two of the three games .
Though the New Zealand leg of the tour did not take long in comparison to the number of Australian games , the British and Irish experienced considerable difficulty across the Tasman after whitewashing the Australians .
The team managed two early wins before losing the test to New Zealand and only winning one more game as well as drawing once .
Despite their difficulties in New Zealand , the tour proved a raging success on-field for the British and Irish .
In 1908 , another tour took place to Australia and New Zealand .
In a reversal of previous practice , the planners allocated more matches in New Zealand rather than in Australia : perhaps the strength of the New Zealand teams and the heavy defeats of all Australian teams on the previous tour influenced this decision .
Some commentators thought that this tour hoped to reach out to rugby communities in Australia , as rugby league ( infamously ) started in Australia in 1908 .
The Anglo-Welsh side ( Irish and Scottish unions did not participate ) performed well in all the non-test matches , but drew a test against New Zealand and lost the other two .
Visits that took place before the 1910 South Africa tour ( the first selected by a committee from the four Home Unions ) had enjoyed a growing degree of support from the authorities , although only one of these included representatives of all four nations .
The 1910 tour to South Africa marked the official beginning of British and Irish rugby tours : the inaugural tour operating under all four unions .
The team performed moderately against the non-test parties , claiming victories in just over half their matches .
The test series , however , went to South Africa , who won two of the three games .
A side managed by Oxford University — supposedly the England rugby team , but actually including three Scottish players — toured Argentina at the time : the people of Argentina termed it the " Combined British" .
The next British Isles team tour did not take place until 1924 , again in South Africa .
The team , led by Ronald Cove-Smith , struggled with injuries and lost three of the four test matches , drawing the other 3–3 .
In total , 21 games were played , with the touring side winning 9 , drawing 3 and losing 9 .
This tour may have marked the occasion when the team first became known as " the Lions " .
In 1927 a short , nine-game series took place in Argentina , with the Lions winning all nine encounters ; the tour did however become a financial success for Argentine rugby .
After a seemingly long absence from New Zealand , the Lions returned in 1930 to some success .
The Lions won all of their games that did not have test status except for the matches against Auckland , Wellington and Canterbury ; they did however lose three of their four test matches against New Zealand , winning the first test 6–3 .
The side also visited Australia , losing a test but winning five out of the six non-test games .
In 1936 the Lions visited Argentina for the second time , winning all ten of their matches and only conceding nine points in the whole tour .
Two years later the Lions toured in South Africa , winning more than half of their normal matches .
Despite having lost the test series to South Africa by game three , the Lions won the final test .
The first post-war tour went to New Zealand and Australia in 1950 .
The Lions , sporting newly redesigned jerseys and displaying a fresh style of play , managed to win 22 and draw one of 29 matches over the two nations .
The Lions won the opening four fixtures before losing to Otago and Southland , but succeeded in holding the All Blacks to a 9–9 draw .
The Lions performed well in the remaining All Black tests though they lost all three , the team did not lose another non-test in the New Zealand leg of the tour .
The Lions won all their games in Australia except for their final fixture against a New South Wales XV in Newcastle .
They won both tests against Australia , in Brisbane , Queensland and in Sydney , New South Wales .
In 1955 the Lions toured South Africa and left with another imposing record , one draw and 19 wins from the 25 fixtures .
The four-test series against South Africa , a thrilling affair , ended in a drawn series .
The 1959 tour to Australia and New Zealand marked once again a very successful tour for the Lions , who only lost six of their 35 fixtures .
The Lions easily won both tests against Australia and lost the first three tests against the All Blacks , but did find victory ( 9–6 ) in the final test .
After the glittering decade of the 1950s , the first tour of the 1960s proved not nearly as successful as previous ones .
The 1962 tour to South Africa saw the Lions still win 16 of their 25 games , but did not fare well against the Springboks , losing three of the four tests .
For the 1966 tour to Australia and New Zealand John Robins became the first Lions Coach , and the trip started off very well for the Lions , who stormed through Australia , winning five non-tests and drawing one ; and most notably defeating Australia in two tests as well .
The Lions however experienced mixed results during the New Zealand leg of the tour , as well as losing all of the tests against the All Blacks .
The Lions also played a test against Canada on their way home , winning 19 to 8 in Toronto .
The 1968 tour of South Africa saw the Lions win 15 of their 16 provincial matches , but the team actually lost three tests against the Springboks and drew one .
The 1970s saw a renaissance for the Lions .
The 1971 team , centred around the skilled Welsh half-back pairing of Gareth Edwards and Barry John , secured a series win over the All Blacks .
The tour started with a loss to Queensland but proceeded to storm through the next provincial fixtures , winning 11 games in a row .
The Lions then went on to defeat the All Blacks in Dunedin .
The Lions would only lose a single match on the rest of the tour , and won the test series against New Zealand , winning and drawing the last two games , to take the series two wins to one .
One of the best-known and most successful Lions team toured South Africa in 1974 under the esteemed Irish forward Willie John McBride .
It went through 22 games unbeaten , and triumphed 3–0 ( with one drawn ) in the test open series .
The test series featured a lot of violence .
The management of the Lions concluded that the Springboks dominated their opponents with physical aggression .
At that time , test match referees came from the home nation , substitutions took place only if a doctor found a player unable to continue and there were no video cameras or sideline officials to prevent violent play .
The Lions decided " to get their retaliation in first " with the infamous "99 call" .
The Lions postulated that a South African referee would probably not send off all of the Lions if they all retaliated against "blatant thuggery " .
Famous video footage of the 'battle of Boet Erasmus Stadium ' shows JPR Williams running over half of the pitch and launching himself at Van Heerden after such a call .
The 1977 tour to New Zealand saw the Lions drop only one non-test out of 21 games , a loss to a Universities side .
The team did not win the test series though , winning one game but losing the other three .
In August 1977 the British Lions made a stopover in Fiji on the way home from their tour of New Zealand .
Fiji beat them 25–21 at Buckhurst Park , Suva .
The team completed a flawless non-test record , winning 14 out of 14 non-test matches on the tour .
The Lions did however lose the first three tests to South Africa , winning the last one , though the series had already been won by the Springboks .
The 1983 tour to New Zealand saw the team successful on the non-test front , winning all but two games , but getting white-washed in the test-series against the All Blacks .
A tour to South Africa by the Lions was anticipated in 1986 .
However , the invitation for the Lions to tour South Africa was never accepted because of controversy surrounding Apartheid .
As a result the anticipated tour never occurred in 1986 .
The Lions did not return to South Africa until 1997 , after the Apartheid era .
A Lions team was selected in 1986 for the International Rugby Board centenary match against a Rest of the World XV in April of that year ; the team was organised by the Four Home Unions Committee and the players were given the status of official British Lions .
The Lions tour to Australia in 1989 was a short affair , being only 12 matches in total .
The tour was very successful for the Lions , who won all eight non-tests and won the test series against Australia , two to one .
The Lions tour to New Zealand in 1993 was the last of the amateur era .
The tourists won six and lost four non-test matches , and lost the test series 2–1 .
The tour to South Africa in 1997 was a success for the Lions , who completed the tour with only two losses .
In 2001 , the ten game tour to Australia , saw the Wallabies win the test series 2–1 .
This series saw the first award of the Tom Richards Trophy .
The Lions ' 2005 tour to New Zealand , coached by 2003 England world cup winning coach Clive Woodward , won all seven games against provincial teams however suffered heavy defeats in all three tests and were narrowly defeated by the New Zealand Maori team .
The Lions faced the World Cup winners South Africa , with Ian McGeechan leading a coaching team including Warren Gatland , Shaun Edwards and Rob Howley .
The Lions were captained by Irish lock Paul O'Connell .
The initial Lions selection consisted of fourteen Irish players , thirteen Welsh , eight English and two Scots in the 37-man squad .
In the first Test on 20 June , they lost 26–21 , and lost the series in the second 28–25 in a tightly-fought game at Loftus Versfeld on 27 June .
The Lions won the third Test 28–9 at Ellis Park , and the series finished 2–1 to South Africa .
During June 2013 the British and Irish Lions toured Australia .
Former Scotland and Lions full-back Andy Irvine was appointed as tour manager in 2010 .
The tour started in Hong Kong with a match against the Barbarians before moving on to Australia for the main tour featuring six provincial matches and three tests .
The next British and Irish Lions tour will be to New Zealand in 2017 .
The current agreement with the SANZAR Nations runs out after the New Zealand tour and negotiations will begin in 2014 on a new one which promises to be markedly different because of the explosion of interest in the Lions .
It has been stated that everything will be up for discussion , from the financial side to scheduling , itineraries , the strength of opposition in warm-up matches and the number of matches played .
Following the performances of the Canadian , American and Argentine teams at the 2011 Rugby World Cup , some commentators have suggested the Lions conduct a shortened tour of the Americas in the future .
The Lions tour three southern hemisphere nations ; Australia , South Africa and New Zealand .
They also routinely toured in Argentina before World War II .
The most recent tour visited Australia in June– July 2013 , and before that the Lions toured South Africa in 2009 .
In a break with tradition , a "home " fixture against Argentina took place at Millennium Stadium in Cardiff on 23 May 2005 , before the Lions went to New Zealand .
On tour , games take place against local provinces , clubs or representative sides as well as the full tests against the host 's national team .
The Lions , and their predecessor teams , have often played games against other nearby countries on tour .
For example , they played Rhodesia ( the future Zimbabwe ) in 1910 , 1924 , 1938 , 1955 , 1962 , 1968 & 1974 during their tours to South Africa .
They also were beaten by Fiji on their 1977 tour to New Zealand .
In addition , they toured pre-independence Namibia ( then South West Africa ) , in 1955 , 1962 , 1968 , and 1974 .
There have also been games in other countries on the way home .
These include games in in 1959 and 1966 , East Africa ( then mostly Kenya , and held in Nairobi) , and an unofficial game against Ceylon ( future Sri Lanka ) in 1950 .
Previous tours have seen some non-Test players become demotivated , but more recently this issue has reduced because of high injury rates , increased use of replacements and greater selection flexibility .
In recent tours a common issue has been weak opposition in many non-Test games , partly as opposition countries have their top players in national training camps , partly as sides protect top players for domestic games which are seen as more commercially important than Lions games , and possibly partly to prevent the Lions having high standard preparatory games .
The Lions have played a number of "home matches " against international opposition .
With the exception of the 2005 home match against Argentina ( which was played as a warm-up to the 2005 British and Irish Lions tour to New Zealand ) , these matches have been one-offs to mark special occasions :
Name of the Lions in the languages of Britain and Ireland :
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Basketball is a sport played by two teams of five players on a rectangular court .
The objective is to shoot a ball through a hoop in diameter and high mounted to a backboard at each end .
Basketball is one of the world 's most popular and widely viewed sports .
A team can score a field goal by shooting the ball through the basket during regular play .
A field goal scores two points for the shooting team if a player is touching or closer to the basket than the three-point line , and three points ( known commonly as a " 3 pointer " or " three " ) if the player is behind the three-point line .
The team with the most points at the end of the game wins , but additional time ( overtime ) may be issued when the game ends with a draw .
The ball can be advanced on the court by bouncing it while walking or running or throwing it to a team mate .
It is a violation to move without dribbling the ball , to carry it , or to hold the ball with both hands then resume dribbling .
A personal foul is penalized , and a free throw is usually awarded to an offensive player if he is fouled while shooting the ball .
A technical foul may also be issued when certain infractions occur , most commonly for unsportsmanlike conduct on the part of a player or coach .
A technical foul gives the opposing team a free throw , and the opposing team also retains possession of the ball .
As well as many techniques for shooting , passing , dribbling and rebounding , basketball has specialized player positions and offensive and defensive structures ( player positioning ) .
Typically , the tallest and strongest members of a team will play the center or power forward positions , while slightly shorter and more agile players will play small forward , and the shortest players or those who possess the best ball handling skills and speed play point guard or shooting guard .
In early December 1891 , Canadian Dr. James Naismith , a physical education professor and instructor at the International Young Men 's Christian Association Training School ( YMCA ) ( today , Springfield College ) in Springfield , Massachusetts was trying to keep his gym class active on a rainy day .
He sought a vigorous indoor game to keep his students occupied and at proper levels of fitness during the long New England winters .
After rejecting other ideas as either too rough or poorly suited to walled-in gymnasiums , he wrote the basic rules and nailed a peach basket onto a 10-foot ( 3.05 m ) elevated track .
In contrast with modern basketball nets , this peach basket retained its bottom , and balls had to be retrieved manually after each "basket " or point scored ; this proved inefficient , however , so the bottom of the basket was removed , allowing the balls to be poked out with a long dowel each time .
Basketball was originally played with a soccer ball .
The first balls made specifically for basketball were brown , and it was only in the late 1950s that Tony Hinkle , searching for a ball that would be more visible to players and spectators alike , introduced the orange ball that is now in common use .
Dribbling was not part of the original game except for the "bounce pass " to teammates .
Passing the ball was the primary means of ball movement .
Dribbling was eventually introduced but limited by the asymmetric shape of early balls .
Dribbling only became a major part of the game around the 1950s , as manufacturing improved the ball shape .
The peach baskets were used until 1906 when they were finally replaced by metal hoops with backboards .
A further change was soon made , so the ball merely passed through .
Whenever a person got the ball in the basket , his team would gain a point .
Whichever team got the most points won the game .
The baskets were originally nailed to the mezzanine balcony of the playing court , but this proved impractical when spectators on the balcony began to interfere with shots .
The backboard was introduced to prevent this interference ; it had the additional effect of allowing rebound shots .
Naismith 's handwritten diaries , discovered by his granddaughter in early 2006 , indicate that he was nervous about the new game he had invented , which incorporated rules from a children 's game called " Duck on a Rock" , as many had failed before it .
The first official game was played in the YMCA gymnasium in Albany , New York on January 20 , 1892 with nine players .
The game ended at 1–0 ; the shot was made from , on a court just half the size of a present-day Streetball or National Basketball Association ( NBA ) court .
Basketball 's early adherents were dispatched to YMCAs throughout the United States , and it quickly spread through the USA and Canada .
By 1895 , it was well established at several women 's high schools .
While the YMCA was responsible for initially developing and spreading the game , within a decade it discouraged the new sport , as rough play and rowdy crowds began to detract from the YMCA 's primary mission .
However , other amateur sports clubs , colleges , and professional clubs quickly filled the void .
In the years before World War I , the Amateur Athletic Union and the Intercollegiate Athletic Association of the United States ( forerunner of the NCAA ) vied for control over the rules for the game .
The first pro league , the National Basketball League , was formed in 1898 to protect players from exploitation and to promote a less rough game .
James Naismith was instrumental in establishing college basketball .
His colleague C.O. Beamis fielded the first college basketball team just a year after the Springfield YMCA game at the suburban Pittsburgh Geneva College .
Naismith himself later coached at the University of Kansas for six years , before handing the reins to renowned coach Forrest " Phog " Allen .
Naismith 's disciple Amos Alonzo Stagg brought basketball to the University of Chicago , while Adolph Rupp , a student of Naismith 's at Kansas , enjoyed great success as coach at the University of Kentucky .
On February 9 , 1895 , the first intercollegiate 5-on-5 game was played at Hamline University between Hamline and the School of Agriculture , which was affiliated with the University of Minnesota .
The School of Agriculture won in a 9–3 game .
In 1901 , colleges , including the University of Chicago , Columbia University , Dartmouth College , the University of Minnesota , the U.S. Naval Academy , the University of Colorado and Yale University began sponsoring men 's games .
In 1905 , frequent injuries on the football field prompted President Theodore Roosevelt to suggest that colleges form a governing body , resulting in the creation of the Intercollegiate Athletic Association of the United States ( IAAUS) .
In 1910 , that body would change its name to the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA ) .
The first Canadian interuniversity basketball game was played at the YMCA in Kingston , Ontario on February 6 , 1904 , when McGill University visited Queen 's University .
McGill won 9–7 in overtime ; the score was 7–7 at the end of regulation play , and a ten-minute overtime period settled the outcome .
A good turnout of spectators watched the game .
The first men 's national championship tournament , the National Association of Intercollegiate Basketball tournament , which still exists as the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics ( NAIA ) tournament , was organized in 1937 .
The first national championship for NCAA teams , the National Invitation Tournament ( NIT ) in New York , was organized in 1938 ; the NCAA national tournament would begin one year later .
College basketball was rocked by gambling scandals from 1948 to 1951 , when dozens of players from top teams were implicated in match fixing and point shaving .
Partially spurred by an association with cheating , the NIT lost support to the NCAA tournament .
Before widespread school district consolidation , most American high schools were far smaller than their present-day counterparts .
During the first decades of the 20th century , basketball quickly became the ideal interscholastic sport due to its modest equipment and personnel requirements .
In the days before widespread television coverage of professional and college sports , the popularity of high school basketball was unrivaled in many parts of America .
Perhaps the most legendary of high school teams was Indiana 's Franklin Wonder Five , which took the nation by storm during the 1920s , dominating Indiana basketball and earning national recognition .
Today virtually every high school in the United States fields a basketball team in varsity competition .
Basketball 's popularity remains high , both in rural areas where they carry the identification of the entire community , as well as at some larger schools known for their basketball teams where many players go on to participate at higher levels of competition after graduation .
In the 2003–04 season , 1,002,797 boys and girls represented their schools in interscholastic basketball competition , according to the National Federation of State High School Associations .
The states of Illinois , Indiana and Kentucky are particularly well known for their residents ' devotion to high school basketball , commonly called Hoosier Hysteria in Indiana ; the critically acclaimed film " Hoosiers " shows high school basketball 's depth of meaning to these communities .
There is currently no national tournament to determine a national high school champion .
The most serious effort was the National Interscholastic Basketball Tournament at the University of Chicago from 1917 to 1930 .
The event was organized by Amos Alonzo Stagg and sent invitations to state champion teams .
The tournament started out as a mostly Midwest affair but grew .
Faced with opposition from the National Federation of State High School Associations and North Central Association of Colleges and Schools that bore a threat of the schools losing their accreditation the last tournament was in 1930 .
The organizations said they were concerned that the tournament was being used to recruit professional players from the prep ranks .
The tournament did not invite minority schools or private/parochial schools .
The National Catholic Interscholastic Basketball Tournament ran from 1924 to 1941 at Loyola University .
The National Catholic Invitational Basketball Tournament from 1954 to 1978 played at a series of venues , including Catholic University , Georgetown and George Mason .
The National Interscholastic Basketball Tournament for Black High Schools was held from 1929 to 1942 at Hampton Institute .
The National Invitational Interscholastic Basketball Tournament was held from 1941 to 1967 starting out at Tuskegee Institute .
Following a pause during World War II it resumed at Tennessee State College in Nashville .
The basis for the champion dwindled after 1954 when " Brown v. Board of Education " began an integration of schools .
The last tournaments were held at Alabama State College from 1964 to 1967 .
There were hundreds of men 's professional basketball teams in towns and cities all over the United States , and little organization of the professional game .
Players jumped from team to team and teams played in armories and smoky dance halls .
Barnstorming squads such as the Original Celtics and two all-African American teams , the New York Renaissance Five ( " Rens " ) and the ( still existing ) Harlem Globetrotters played up to two hundred games a year on their national tours .
In 1946 , the Basketball Association of America ( BAA ) was formed .
The first game was played in Toronto , Ontario , Canada between the Toronto Huskies and New York Knickerbockers on November 1 , 1946 .
Three seasons later , in 1949 , the BAA merged with the National Basketball League to form the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) .
By the 1950s , basketball had become a major college sport , thus paving the way for a growth of interest in professional basketball .
In 1959 , a basketball hall of fame was founded in Springfield , Massachusetts , site of the first game .
Its rosters include the names of great players , coaches , referees and people who have contributed significantly to the development of the game .
The hall of fame has people who have accomplished many goals in their career in basketball .
An upstart organization , the American Basketball Association , emerged in 1967 and briefly threatened the NBA 's dominance until the ABA-NBA merger in 1976 .
Today the NBA is the top professional basketball league in the world in terms of popularity , salaries , talent , and level of competition .
The NBA has featured many famous players , including George Mikan , the first dominating "big man " ; ball-handling wizard Bob Cousy and defensive genius Bill Russell of the Boston Celtics ; Wilt Chamberlain , who originally played for the barnstorming Harlem Globetrotters ; all-around stars Oscar Robertson and Jerry West ; more recent big men Kareem Abdul-Jabbar , Shaquille O'Neal and Karl Malone ; playmaker John Stockton ; crowd-pleasing forward Julius Erving ; European stars Dirk Nowitzki and Dražen Petrović and the three players who many credit with ushering the professional game to its highest level of popularity : Larry Bird , Earvin " Magic " Johnson , and Michael Jordan .
In 2001 , the NBA formed a developmental league , the NBDL.
As of 2012 , the league has 16 teams .
The International Basketball Federation was formed in 1932 by eight founding nations : Argentina , Czechoslovakia , Greece , Italy , Latvia , Portugal , Romania and Switzerland .
At this time , the organization only oversaw amateur players .
Its acronym , derived from the French " Fédération Internationale de Basketball Amateur" , was thus "FIBA" .
Men 's Basketball was first included at the Berlin 1936 Summer Olympics , although a demonstration tournament was held in 1904 .
The United States defeated Canada in the first final , played outdoors .
This competition has usually been dominated by the United States , whose team has won all but three titles , the first loss in a controversial final game in Munich in 1972 against the Soviet Union .
In 1950 the first FIBA World Championship for men was held in Argentina .
Three years later , the first FIBA World Championship for Women was held in Chile .
Women 's basketball was added to the Olympics in 1976 , which were held in Montreal , Canada with teams such as the Soviet Union , Brazil and Australia rivaling the American squads .
FIBA dropped the distinction between amateur and professional players in 1989 , and in 1992 , professional players played for the first time in the Olympic Games .
The United States ' dominance continued with the introduction of their Dream Team .
However , with developing programs elsewhere , other national teams started to beat the United States .
A team made entirely of NBA players finished sixth in the 2002 World Championships in Indianapolis , behind Yugoslavia , Argentina , Germany , New Zealand and Spain .
In the 2004 Athens Olympics , the United States suffered its first Olympic loss while using professional players , falling to Puerto Rico ( in a 19-point loss ) and Lithuania in group games , and being eliminated in the semifinals by Argentina .
It eventually won the bronze medal defeating Lithuania , finishing behind Argentina and Italy .
In 2006 , in the World Championship of Japan , the United States advanced to the semifinals but were defeated by Greece by 101–95 .
In the bronze medal game it beat team Argentina and finished 3rd behind Greece and Spain .
After the disappointments of 2002 through 2006 , the U.S. regrouped , reestablishing themselves as the dominant international team behind the " Redeem Team" , which won gold at the 2008 Olympics , and the so-called "B-Team" , which won gold at the 2010 FIBA World Championship in Turkey despite featuring no players from the 2008 squad .
The all-tournament teams at the 2002 and 2006 FIBA World Championships , respectively held in Indianapolis and Japan , demonstrate the globalization of the game equally dramatically .
Only one member of either team was American , namely Carmelo Anthony in 2006 .
The 2002 team featured Nowitzki , Ginobili , Yao , Peja Stojakovic of Yugoslavia ( now of Serbia ) , and Pero Cameron of New Zealand .
Ginobili also made the 2006 team ; the other members were Anthony , Gasol , his Spanish teammate Jorge Garbajosa and Theodoros Papaloukas of Greece .
The only players on either team to never have joined the NBA are Cameron and Papaloukas .
The all-tournament team from the 2010 edition in Turkey featured four NBA players—MVP Kevin Durant of Team USA and the Oklahoma City Thunder , Linas Kleiza of Lithuania and the Toronto Raptors , Luis Scola of Argentina and the Houston Rockets , and Hedo Türkoğlu of Turkey and the Phoenix Suns .
The only non-NBA player was Serbia 's Miloš Teodosić .
The strength of international Basketball is evident in the fact that Team USA won none of the three world championships held between 1998 and 2006 , with Serbia ( then known as Yugoslavia ) winning in 1998 and 2002 and Spain in 2006 .
Worldwide , basketball tournaments are held for boys and girls of all age levels .
The global popularity of the sport is reflected in the nationalities represented in the NBA .
Players from all six inhabited continents currently play in the NBA .
Top international players began coming into the NBA in the mid-1990s , including Croatians Dražen Petrović and Toni Kukoč , Serbian Vlade Divac , Lithuanians Arvydas Sabonis and Šarūnas Marčiulionis and German Detlef Schrempf .
In the Philippines , the Philippine Basketball Association 's first game was played on April 9 , 1975 at the Araneta Coliseum in Cubao , Quezon City .
It was founded as a "rebellion " of several teams from the now-defunct Manila Industrial and Commercial Athletic Association which was tightly controlled by the Basketball Association of the Philippines ( now defunct ) , the then-FIBA recognized national association .
Nine teams from the MICAA participated in the league 's first season that opened on April 9 , 1975 .
The NBL is Australia 's pre-eminent men 's professional basketball league .
The league commenced in 1979 , playing a winter season ( April–September ) and did so until the completion of the 20th season in 1998 .
The 1998/99 season , which commenced only months later , was the first season after the shift to the current summer season format ( October–April ) .
This shift was an attempt to avoid competing directly against Australia 's various football codes .
It features 8 teams from around Australia and one in New Zealand .
A few players including Luc Longley , Andrew Gaze , Shane Heal , Chris Anstey and Andrew Bogut made it big internationally , becoming poster figures for the sport in Australia .
The Women 's National Basketball League began in 1981 .
Women 's basketball began in 1892 at Smith College when Senda Berenson , a physical education teacher , modified Naismith 's rules for women .
Shortly after she was hired at Smith , she went to Naismith to learn more about the game .
Fascinated by the new sport and the values it could teach , she organized the first women’s collegiate basketball game on March 21 , 1893 , when her Smith freshmen and sophomores played against one another .
However , the first women 's interinstitutional game was played in 1892 between the University of California and Miss Head 's School .
Berenson 's rules were first published in 1899 , and two years later she became the editor of A.G. Spalding’s first Women 's Basketball Guide .
Berenson 's freshmen played the sophomore class in the first women 's intercollegiate basketball game at Smith College , March 21 , 1893 .
The same year , Mount Holyoke and Sophie Newcomb College ( coached by Clara Gregory Baer ) women began playing basketball .
By 1895 , the game had spread to colleges across the country , including Wellesley , Vassar , and Bryn Mawr .
The first intercollegiate women 's game was on April 4 , 1896 .
Stanford women played Berkeley , 9-on-9 , ending in a 2–1 Stanford victory .
Women 's basketball development was more structured than that for men in the early years .
In 1905 , the Executive Committee on Basket Ball Rules ( National Women 's Basketball Committee ) was created by the American Physical Education Association .
These rules called for six to nine players per team and 11 officials .
The International Women 's Sports Federation ( 1924 ) included a women 's basketball competition .
37 women 's high school varsity basketball or state tournaments were held by 1925 .
And in 1926 , the Amateur Athletic Union backed the first national women 's basketball championship , complete with men 's rules .
The Edmonton Grads , a touring Canadian women 's team based in Edmonton , Alberta , operated between 1915 and 1940 .
The Grads toured all over North America , and were exceptionally successful .
They posted a record of 522 wins and only 20 losses over that span , as they met any team which wanted to challenge them , funding their tours from gate receipts .
The Grads also shone on several exhibition trips to Europe , and won four consecutive exhibition Olympics tournaments , in 1924 , 1928 , 1932 , and 1936 ; however , women 's basketball was not an official Olympic sport until 1976 .
The Grads ' players were unpaid , and had to remain single .
The Grads ' style focused on team play , without overly emphasizing skills of individual players .
The first women 's AAU All-America team was chosen in 1929 .
Women 's industrial leagues sprang up throughout the United States , producing famous athletes , including Babe Didrikson of the Golden Cyclones , and the All American Red Heads Team , which competed against men 's teams , using men 's rules .
By 1938 , the women 's national championship changed from a three-court game to two-court game with six players per team .
The NBA-backed Women 's National Basketball Association ( WNBA ) began in 1997 .
Though it had shaky attendance figures , several marquee players ( Lisa Leslie , Diana Taurasi , and Candace Parker among others ) have helped the league 's popularity and level of competition .
Other professional women 's basketball leagues in the United States , such as the American Basketball League ( 1996-1998 ) , have folded in part because of the popularity of the WNBA .
The WNBA has been looked at by many as a niche league .
However , the league has recently taken steps forward .
In June 2007 , the WNBA signed a contract extension with ESPN.
The new television deal runs from 2009 to 2016 .
Along with this deal , came the first ever rights fees to be paid to a women 's professional sports league .
Over the eight years of the contract , "millions and millions of dollars " will be "dispersed to the league 's teams . "
The WNBA gets more viewers on national television broadcasts ( 413,000 ) than both Major League Soccer ( 253,000 ) and the NHL ( 310,732 ) .
In a March 12 , 2009 article , NBA commissioner David Stern said that in the bad economy , " the NBA is far less profitable than the WNBA .
We 're losing a lot of money amongst a large number of teams .
We 're budgeting the WNBA to break even this year . "
Measurements and time limits discussed in this section often vary among tournaments and organizations ; international and NBA rules are used in this section .
The object of the game is to outscore one 's opponents by throwing the ball through the opponents ' basket from above while preventing the opponents from doing so on their own .
An attempt to score in this way is called a shot .
A successful shot is worth two points , or three points if it is taken from beyond the three-point arc which is from the basket in international games and in NBA games .
A one-point shot can be earned when shooting from the foul line after a foul is made .
Games are played in four quarters of 10 ( FIBA ) or 12 minutes ( NBA ) .
College games use two 20-minute halves , while United States high school varsity games use 8 minute quarters .
15 minutes are allowed for a half-time break under FIBA , NBA , and NCAA rules and 10 minutes in United States high schools .
Overtime periods are five minutes in length except for high school which is four minutes in length .
The time allowed is actual playing time ; the clock is stopped while the play is not active .
Therefore , games generally take much longer to complete than the allotted game time , typically about two hours .
Five players from each team may be on the court at one time .
Substitutions are unlimited but can only be done when play is stopped .
Teams also have a coach , who oversees the development and strategies of the team , and other team personnel such as assistant coaches , managers , statisticians , doctors and trainers .
For both men 's and women 's teams , a standard uniform consists of a pair of shorts and a jersey with a clearly visible number , unique within the team , printed on both the front and back .
Players wear high-top sneakers that provide extra ankle support .
Typically , team names , players ' names and , outside of North America , sponsors are printed on the uniforms .
A limited number of time-outs , clock stoppages requested by a coach ( or sometimes mandated in the NBA ) for a short meeting with the players , are allowed .
They generally last no longer than one minute ( 100 seconds in the NBA ) unless , for televised games , a commercial break is needed .
The game is controlled by the officials consisting of the referee ( referred to as crew chief in the NBA ) , one or two umpires ( referred to as referees in the NBA ) and the table officials .
For college , the NBA , and many high schools , there are a total of three referees on the court .
The table officials are responsible for keeping track of each teams scoring , timekeeping , individual and team fouls , player substitutions , team possession arrow , and the shot clock .
The only essential equipment in a basketball game is the ball and the court : a flat , rectangular surface with baskets at opposite ends .
Competitive levels require the use of more equipment such as clocks , score sheets , scoreboard( s ) , alternating possession arrows , and whistle-operated stop-clock systems .
A regulation basketball court in international games is 91.9 feet long and 49.2 feet wide .
In the NBA and NCAA the court is 94 feet by 50 feet .
Most courts have wood flooring , usually constructed from maple planks running in the same direction as the longer court dimension .
The name and logo of the home team is usually painted on or around the center circle .
The basket is a steel rim 18 inches diameter with an attached net affixed to a backboard that measures 6 feet by 3.5 feet and one basket is at each end of the court .
The white outlined box on the backboard is 18 inches high and 2 feet wide .
At almost all levels of competition , the top of the rim is exactly 10 feet above the court and 4 feet inside the baseline .
While variation is possible in the dimensions of the court and backboard , it is considered important for the basket to be of the correct height – a rim that is off by just a few inches can have an adverse effect on shooting .
The size of the basketball is also regulated .
For men , the official ball is 29.5 inches in circumference ( size 7 , or a " 295 ball" ) and weighs 22 oz .
If women are playing , the official basketball size is 28.5 inches in circumference ( size 6 , or a " 285 ball" ) with a weight of 20 oz .
The ball may be advanced toward the basket by being shot , passed between players , thrown , tapped , rolled or dribbled ( bouncing the ball while running ) .
The ball must stay within the court ; the last team to touch the ball before it travels out of bounds forfeits possession .
The ball is out of bounds if it touches or crosses over a boundary line , or touches a player who is out of bounds .
This is in contrast to other sports such as football , volleyball , and tennis ( but not rugby or American football ) where the ball ( or player ) is still considered in if any part of it is touching a boundary line .
The ball-handler may not step with both feet without dribbling , an infraction known as traveling , nor dribble with both hands or hold the ball and resume dribbling , a violation called double dribbling .
Any part of the player 's hand cannot be directly under the ball while dribbling ; doing so is known as carrying the ball .
A team , once having established ball control in the front half of their court , may not return the ball to the backcourt and be the first to touch it .
The ball may not be kicked , nor be struck with the fist .
A violation of these rules results in loss of possession , or , if committed by the defense , a reset of the shot clock ( with some exceptions in the NBA ) .
There are limits imposed on the time taken before progressing the ball past halfway ( 8 seconds in FIBA and the NBA ; 10 seconds in NCAA men 's play and high school for both sexes , but no limit in NCAA women 's play ) , before attempting a shot ( 24 seconds in FIBA and the NBA , 30 seconds in NCAA women 's and Canadian Interuniversity Sport play for both sexes , and 35 seconds in NCAA men 's play ) , holding the ball while closely guarded ( 5 seconds ) , and remaining in the restricted area known as the free-throw lane , ( or the "key " ) ( 3 seconds ) .
These rules are designed to promote more offense .
No player may touch the ball on its downward trajectory to the basket , unless it is obvious that the ball has no chance of entering the basket ( goaltending ) .
In addition , no player may touch the ball while it is on or in the basket ; when any part of the ball is in the spacious cylinder above the basket ( the area extended upwards from the basket ) ; or when the ball is outside the cylinder , if the player reaches through the basket and touches it .
If a defensive player goaltends or commits basket interference , the basket is awarded and the offending team gets the ball .
If a teammate of the player shooting goaltends or commits interference , the basket is cancelled and play continues with the defensive team being given possession .
An attempt to unfairly disadvantage an opponent through physical contact is illegal and is called a foul .
These are most commonly committed by defensive players ; however , they can be committed by offensive players as well .
Players who are fouled either receive the ball to pass inbounds again , or receive one or more free throws if they are fouled in the act of shooting , depending on whether the shot was successful .
One point is awarded for making a free throw , which is attempted from a line from the basket .
The referee may use discretion in calling fouls ( for example , by considering whether an unfair advantage was gained ) , sometimes making fouls controversial calls or no-calls .
The calling of fouls can vary between games , leagues and even among referees .
A player or coach who shows poor sportsmanship , such as by arguing with a referee or by fighting with another player , can be charged with a more serious foul called a technical foul .
The penalty involves free throws ( where , unlike a personal foul , the other team can choose any player to shoot ) and varies among leagues .
A blatant foul involving physical contact that is either excessive or unnecessary is called an intentional foul ( flagrant foul in the NBA ) .
In FIBA , a foul resulting in ejection is called a disqualifying foul , while in leagues other than the NBA , such a foul is referred to as flagrant .
If a team exceeds a certain limit of team fouls in a given period (quarter or half ) – four for NBA and international games – the opposing team is awarded one or two free throws on all subsequent non-shooting fouls for that period , the number depending on the league .
In the US college and high school games , if a team reaches 7 fouls in a half , the opposing team is awarded one free throw , along with a second shot if the first is made .
If a team exceeds 10 fouls in the half , the opposing team is awarded two free throws on all subsequent fouls for the half .
When a team shoots foul shots , the opponents may not interfere with the shooter , nor may they try to regain possession until the last or potentially last free throw is in the air .
After a team has committed a specified number of fouls , it is said to be "in the penalty " .
On scoreboards , this is usually signified with an indicator light reading " Bonus " or " Penalty " with an illuminated directional arrow indicating that team is to receive free throws when fouled by the opposing team .
( Some scoreboards also indicate the number of fouls committed . )
If a team misses the first shot of a two-shot situation , the opposing team must wait for the completion of the second shot before attempting to reclaim possession of the ball and continuing play .
If a player is fouled while attempting a shot and the shot is unsuccessful , the player is awarded a number of free throws equal to the value of the attempted shot .
A player fouled while attempting a regular two-point shot , then , receives two shots .
A player fouled while attempting a three-point shot , on the other hand , receives three shots .
If a player is fouled while attempting a shot and the shot is successful , typically the player
will be awarded one additional free throw for one point .
shot , this is called a " three-point play " or "four-point play " ( or more colloquially , an " and one " ) because of the basket made at the time of the foul ( 2 or 3 points ) and the additional free throw ( 1 point ) .
Although the rules do not specify any positions whatsoever , they have evolved as part of basketball .
During the first five decades of basketball 's evolution , one guard , two forwards , and two centers or two guards , two forwards , and one center were used .
Since the 1980s , more specific positions have evolved , namely :
Point guard ( often called the " 1" ) : usually the fastest player on the team , organizes the team 's offense by controlling the ball and making sure that it gets to the right player at the right time .
Shooting guard ( the " 2" ) : creates a high volume of shots on offense , mainly long-ranged ; and guards the opponent 's best perimeter player on defense .
Small forward ( the " 3" ) : often primarily responsible for scoring points via cuts to the basket and dribble penetration ; on defense seeks rebounds and steals , but sometimes plays more actively .
Power forward ( the " 4" ) : plays offensively often with their back to the basket ; on defense , plays under the basket ( in a zone defense ) or against the opposing power forward ( in man-to-man defense ) .
Center ( the " 5" ) : uses height and size to score ( on offense ) , to protect the basket closely ( on defense ) , or to rebound .
On some occasions , teams will choose to use a " three guard offense " , replacing one of the forwards or center with a third guard .
There are two main defensive strategies : "zone defense " and "man-to-man defense " .
In a zone defense , each player is assigned to guard a specific area of the court .
In a man-to-man defense , each defensive player guards a specific opponent .
Man-to-man defense is generally preferred at higher levels of competition , as it is intuitively easier to understand and avoid mismatches between players who play different positions .
However , zone defenses are sometimes used in particular situations or simply to confuse the offense with an unexpected look .
Offensive plays are more varied , normally involving planned passes and movement by players without the ball .
A quick movement by an offensive player without the ball to gain an advantageous position is known as a " cut " .
A legal attempt by an offensive player to stop an opponent from guarding a teammate , by standing in the defender 's way such that the teammate cuts next to him , is a "screen " or "pick" .
The two plays are combined in the "pick and roll" , in which a player sets a pick and then "rolls " away from the pick towards the basket .
Screens and cuts are very important in offensive plays ; these allow the quick passes and teamwork which can lead to a successful basket .
Teams almost always have several offensive plays planned to ensure their movement is not predictable .
On court , the point guard is usually responsible for indicating which play will occur .
Defensive and offensive structures , and positions , are more emphasized in higher levels in basketball ; it is these that a coach normally requests a time-out to discuss .
Shooting is the act of attempting to score points by throwing the ball through the basket , methods varying with players and situations .
Typically , a player faces the basket with both feet facing the basket .
A player will rest the ball on the fingertips of the dominant hand ( the shooting arm ) slightly above the head , with the other hand supporting the side of the ball .
The ball is usually shot by jumping ( though not always ) and extending the shooting arm .
The shooting arm , fully extended with the wrist fully bent , is held stationary for a moment following the release of the ball , known as a "follow-through" .
Players often try to put a steady backspin on the ball to absorb its impact with the rim .
The ideal trajectory of the shot is somewhat controversial , but generally a proper arc is recommended .
Players may shoot directly into the basket or may use the backboard to redirect the ball into the basket .
The two most common shots that use the above described setup are the " set-shot " and the " jump-shot" .
The set-shot is taken from a standing position , with neither foot leaving the floor , typically used for free throws , and in other circumstances whilst the jump-shot is taken in mid-air , the ball released near the top of the jump .
This provides much greater power and range , and it also allows the player to elevate over the defender .
Failure to release the ball before the feet return to the floor is considered a traveling violation .
This shot requires the player to be in motion toward the basket , and to "lay " the ball "up " and into the basket , typically off the backboard ( the backboard-free , underhand version is called a "finger roll" ) .
The most crowd-pleasing and typically highest-percentage accuracy shot is the " slam dunk" , in which the player jumps very high and throws the ball downward , through the basket whilst touching it .
Another shot that is becoming common is the " circus shot " .
The circus shot is a low-percentage shot that is flipped , heaved , scooped , or flung toward the hoop while the shooter is off-balance , airborne , falling down , and/or facing away from the basket .
A back-shot is a shot taken when the player is facing away from the basket , and may be shot with the dominant hand , or both ; but there is a very low chance that the shot will be successful .
A shot that misses both the rim and the backboard completely is referred to as an "air-ball" .
A particularly bad shot , or one that only hits the backboard , is jocularly called a brick .
The objective of rebounding is to successfully gain possession of the basketball after a missed field goal or free throw , as it rebounds from the hoop or backboard .
This plays a major role in the game , as most possessions end when a team misses a shot .
There are two categories of rebounds : offensive rebounds , in which the ball is recovered by the offensive side and does not change possession , and defensive rebounds , in which the defending team gains possession of the loose ball .
The majority of rebounds are defensive , as the team on defense tends to be in better position to recover missed shots .
A pass is a method of moving the ball between players .
Most passes are accompanied by a step forward to increase power and are followed through with the hands to ensure accuracy .
The ball is passed directly from the passer 's chest to the receiver 's chest .
A proper chest pass involves an outward snap of the thumbs to add velocity and leaves the defence little time to react .
Here , the passer bounces the ball crisply about two-thirds of the way from his own chest to the receiver .
The ball strikes the court and bounces up toward the receiver .
The bounce pass takes longer to complete than the chest pass , but it is also harder for the opposing team to intercept (kicking the ball deliberately is a violation ) .
Thus , players often use the bounce pass in crowded moments , or to pass around a defender .
The "overhead pass " is used to pass the ball over a defender .
The ball is released while over the passer 's head .
The "outlet pass " occurs after a team gets a defensive rebound .
The next pass after the rebound is the "outlet pass " .
The crucial aspect of any good pass is it being difficult to intercept .
Good passers can pass the ball with great accuracy and they know exactly where each of their other teammates prefers to receive the ball .
A special way of doing this is passing the ball without looking at the receiving teammate .
Another advanced style of passing is the "behind-the-back pass " which , as the description implies , involves throwing the ball behind the passer 's back to a teammate .
Although some players can perform such a pass effectively , many coaches discourage no-look or behind-the-back passes , believing them to be difficult to control and more likely to result in turnovers or violations .
Dribbling is the act of bouncing the ball continuously with one hand , and is a requirement for a player to take steps with the ball .
To dribble , a player pushes the ball down towards the ground with the fingertips rather than patting it ; this ensures greater control .
When dribbling past an opponent , the dribbler should dribble with the hand farthest from the opponent , making it more difficult for the defensive player to get to the ball .
It is therefore important for a player to be able to dribble competently with both hands .
Good dribblers ( or "ball handlers " ) tend to bounce the ball low to the ground , reducing the distance of travel of the ball from the floor to the hand , making it more difficult for the defender to " steal " the ball .
Good ball handlers frequently dribble behind their backs , between their legs , and switch directions suddenly , making a less predictable dribbling pattern that is more difficult to defend against .
This is called a crossover , which is the most effective way to move past defenders while dribbling .
A skilled player can dribble without watching the ball , using the dribbling motion or peripheral vision to keep track of the ball 's location .
By not having to focus on the ball , a player can look for teammates or scoring opportunities , as well as avoid the danger of having someone steal the ball away from him/her .
A block is performed when , after a shot is attempted , a defender succeeds in altering the shot by touching the ball .
In almost all variants of play , it is illegal to touch the ball after it is in the downward path of its arc ; this is known as "goaltending" .
It is also illegal under NBA and Men 's NCAA basketball to block a shot after it has touched the backboard , or when any part of the ball is directly above the rim .
Under international rules it is illegal to block a shot that is in the downward path of its arc or one that has touched the backboard until the ball has hit the rim .
After the ball hits the rim , it is again legal to touch it even though it is no longer considered as a block performed .
To block a shot , a player has to be able to reach a point higher than where the shot is released .
Thus , height can be an advantage in blocking .
Players who are taller and playing the power forward or center positions generally record more blocks than players who are shorter and playing the guard positions .
However , with good timing and a sufficiently high vertical leap , even shorter players can be effective shot blockers .
At the professional level , most male players are above and most women above .
Guards , for whom physical coordination and ball-handling skills are crucial , tend to be the smallest players .
Almost all forwards in the men 's pro leagues are or taller .
According to a survey given to all NBA teams , the average height of all NBA players is just under , with the average weight being close to .
The tallest players ever in the NBA were Manute Bol and Gheorghe Mureşan , who were both tall .
The tallest current NBA player is Hasheem Thabeet , who stands at .
At , Margo Dydek was the tallest player in the history of the WNBA .
The shortest player ever to play in the NBA is Muggsy Bogues at .
Other short players have thrived at the pro level .
Anthony " Spud " Webb was just tall , but had a 42-inch ( 1.07 m ) vertical leap , giving him significant height when jumping .
While shorter players are often not very good at defending against shooting , their ability to navigate quickly through crowded areas of the court and steal the ball by reaching low are strengths .
Variations of basketball are activities based on the game of basketball , using common basketball skills and equipment ( primarily the ball and basket ) .
Some variations are only superficial rules changes , while others are distinct games with varying degrees of basketball influences .
Other variations include children 's games , contests or activities meant to help players reinforce skills .
There are principal basketball sports with variations on basketball including Wheelchair basketball , Water basketball , Beach basketball , Slamball , Streetball and Unicycle basketball .
An earlier version of basketball was Six-on-six basketball played until the end of the 1950s .
Horseball is a game played on horseback where a ball is handled and points are scored by shooting it through a high net ( approximately 1.5m×1.5m ) .
The sport is like a combination of polo , rugby , and basketball .
There is even a form played on donkeys known as Donkey basketball , but that version has come under attack from animal rights groups .
There are also other basketball sports , such as :
Beach basketball has grown to a very popular , widespread competitive sport .
Spin-offs from basketball that are now separate sports include :
Basketball has been adopted by various social groups , which have established their own environments and sometimes their own rules .
Such socialized forms of basketball include the following .
Originally played by keeping track of stats by hand , it was popularized during the 1990s after the advent of the Internet .
Those who play this game are sometimes referred to as General Managers , who draft actual NBA players and compute their basketball statistics .
The game was popularized by ESPN Fantasy Sports , NBA.com , and Yahoo!
Other sports websites provided the same format keeping the game interesting with participants actually owning specific players .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Bastille Day is the name given in English speaking countries to the French National Day , which is celebrated on 14 July each year .
In France , it is formally called La Fête Nationale ( ; " The National Celebration " ) and commonly Le quatorze juillet ( ; " the fourteenth of July " ) .
The French National Day commemorates the beginning of the French Revolution with the Storming of the Bastille on the 14 July 1789 , as well as the Fête de la Fédération on the 14 July 1790 .
The oldest and largest regular military parade in Europe is held on the morning of 14 July , on the Champs-Élysées avenue in Paris in front of the President of the Republic , French officials and foreign guests .
The Bastille Day Military Parade opens with cadets from the École polytechnique , Saint-Cyr , École Navale , and so forth , then other infantry troops , then motorized troops ; aircraft of the Patrouille de France aerobatics team fly above .
In recent times , it has become custom to invite units from France 's allies to the parade ; in 2004 during the centenary of the Entente Cordiale , British troops ( the band of the Royal Marines , the Household flying overhead .
In 2007 the German 26th Airborne Brigade led the march followed by British Royal Marines .
In 2013 , Malian soldiers opened the parade , following the Franco-Malian military Operation Serval .
Members of the United Nations ' MINUSMA forces also took part in the parade , including soldiers from twelve other African countries , notably Chad .
United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon attended the parade alongside French President François Hollande .
The president gives an interview to members of the press , discussing the situation of the country , recent events and projects for the future .
Nicolas Sarkozy , elected president in 2007 , chose not to give it .
François Hollande , elected president in 2012 , reinstated it .
On 19 May 1789 , Louis XVI convened the Estates-General to hear their grievances .
The deputies of the Third Estate representing the common people ( the two others were the Catholic Church and nobility ) decided to break away and form a National Assembly .
On June 20 the deputies of the Third Estate took the Tennis Court Oath , swearing not to separate until a constitution had been established .
They were gradually joined by delegates of the other estates ; Louis XVI started to recognize their validity on 27 June .
The assembly renamed itself the National Constituent Assembly on 9 July , and began to function as a legislature and to draft a constitution .
In the wake of the 11 July dismissal of Jacques Necker , the people of Paris , fearful that they and their representatives would be attacked by the royal military , and seeking to gain ammunition and gunpowder for the general populace , stormed the Bastille , a fortress-prison in Paris which had often held people jailed on the basis of "lettres de cachet" , arbitrary royal indictments that could not be appealed .
Besides holding a large cache of ammunition and gunpowder , the Bastille had been known for holding political prisoners whose writings had displeased the royal government , and was thus a symbol of the absolutism of the monarchy .
As it happened , at the time of the siege in July 1789 there were only seven inmates , none of great political significance .
When the crowd—eventually reinforced by mutinous "gardes françaises "—proved a fair match for the fort 's defenders , Governor de Launay , the commander of the Bastille , capitulated and opened the gates to avoid a mutual massacre .
However , possibly because of a misunderstanding , fighting resumed .
Ninety-eight attackers and just one defender died in the actual fighting , but in the aftermath , de Launay and seven other defenders were killed , as was the 'prévôt des marchands ' ( roughly , mayor ) Jacques de Flesselles .
Shortly after the storming of the Bastille , on 4 August feudalism was abolished and on 26 August , the " Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen " was proclaimed .
The Fête de la Fédération on the 14 July 1790 was a celebration to commemorate the first anniversary of the Storming of the Bastille and the unity of the French Nation during the French Revolution .
The event took place on the Champ de Mars , which was at the time far outside Paris .
The place had been transformed on a voluntary basis by the population of Paris itself , in what was recalled as the Journée des brouettes ( " Wheelbarrow Day " ) .
A mass was celebrated by Talleyrand , bishop of Autun .
The popular General Lafayette , as captain of the National Guard of Paris and confidant of the king , took his oath to the constitution , followed by King Louis XVI.
After the end of the official celebration , the day ended in a huge four-day popular feast and people celebrated with fireworks , as well as fine wine and running naked through the streets in order to display their great freedom .
On 30 June 1878 , a feast had been arranged in Paris by official decision to honour the French Republic ( the event was commemorated in a painting by Claude Monet ) .
On 14 July 1879 , another feast took place , with a semi-official aspect ; the events of the day included a reception in the Chamber of Deputies , organised and presided over by Léon Gambetta , a military review in Longchamp , and a Republican Feast in the Pré Catelan .
All through France , " Le Figaro " wrote , "people feasted much to honour the storming of the Bastille " .
On 21 May 1880 , Benjamin Raspail proposed a law to have " the Republic choose the 14 July as a yearly national holiday" .
The Assembly voted in favour of the proposal on 21 May and 8 June .
The Senate approved on it 27 and 29 June , favouring 14 July against 4 August ( honouring the end of the feudal system on 4 August 1789 ) .
The law was made official on 6 July 1880 , and the Ministry of the Interior recommended to Prefects that the day should be "celebrated with all the brilliance that the local resources allow" .
Indeed , the celebrations of the new holiday in 1880 were particularly magnificent .
In the debate leading up to the adoption of the holiday , Henri Martin , chairman of the French Senate , addressed that chamber on 29 June 1880 :
The Bastille Day Military Parade is the French military parade that has been held on the morning of 14 July each year in Paris since 1880 .
While previously held elsewhere within or near the capital city , since 1918 it has been held on the Champs-Élysées , with the evident agreement of the Allies as represented in the Versailles Peace Conference , and with the exception of the period of German occupation from 1940 to 1944 .
The parade passes down the Champs-Élysées from the Arc de Triomphe to the Place de la Concorde , where the President of the French Republic , his government and foreign ambassadors to France stand .
This is a popular event in France , broadcast on French TV , and is the oldest and largest regular military parade in Europe .
In some years , invited detachments of foreign troops take part in the parade and foreign statesmen attend as guests .
Smaller military parades are held in French garrison towns , including Toulon and Belfort , with local troops .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
In mathematics , a binary operation on a set is a calculation that combines two elements of the set ( called operands ) to produce another element of the set ( more formally , an operation whose arity is two , and whose two domains and one codomain are ( subsets of ) the same set ) .
Examples include the familiar elementary arithmetic operations of addition , subtraction , multiplication and division .
Other examples are readily found in different areas of mathematics , such as vector addition , matrix multiplication and conjugation in groups .
More precisely , a binary operation on a set " S" is a map which sends elements of the Cartesian product to " S" :
Because the result of performing the operation on a pair of elements of " S" is again an element of " S" , the operation is called a closed binary operation on " S" ( or sometimes expressed as having the property of closure ) .
If " f " is not a function , but is instead a partial function , it is called a partial binary operation .
For instance , division of real numbers is a partial binary operation , because one ca n't divide by zero : " a"/0 is not defined for any real " a" .
Note however that both in algebra and model theory the binary operations considered are defined on all of .
Sometimes , especially in computer science , the term is used for any binary function .
Binary operations are the keystone of algebraic structures studied in abstract algebra : they are essential in the definitions of groups , monoids , semigroups , rings , and more .
Most generally , a "magma " is a set together with some binary operation defined on it .
Typical examples of binary operations are the addition ( + ) and multiplication ( × ) of numbers and matrices as well as composition of functions on a single set .
Many binary operations of interest in both algebra and formal logic are commutative , satisfying f( " a" ,"b" ) = f( "b" , "a" ) for all elements " a " and " b " in " S" , or associative , satisfying f( f( " a" ,"b" ) , " c" ) = f( " a" , f( "b" ," c" ) ) for all " a" , " b " and " c " in " S" .
Many also have identity elements and inverse elements .
The first three examples above are commutative and all of the above examples are associative .
The paper-scissors-rock binary operation is commutative but not associative .
On the set of real numbers R, subtraction , that is , f( " a" ,"b" ) = " a " - " b" , is a binary operation which is not commutative since , in general , " a " - " b " ≠ " b " - " a" .
It is also not associative , since , in general , " a " - ( "b " - " c" ) ≠ ( " a " - " b" ) - " c " ; for instance , 1 - ( 2 - 3 ) = 2 but ( 1 - 2 ) - 3 = -4.
On the set of natural numbers N , the binary operation exponentiation , f( " a" ,"b" ) = " a " "b" , is not commutative since , in general , " a " "b " ≠ " b " " a " and is also not associative since f( f( " a" ,"b" ) ," c" ) ≠ f( " a" , f( "b" ," c" ) ) .
For instance , with " a " = 2 , " b " = 3 and " c " = 2 , f( 23,2 ) = f(8,2 ) = 64 , but f( 2,32 ) = f( 2,9 ) = 512 .
By changing the set N to the set of integers Z , this binary operation becomes a partial binary operation since it is now undefined when " a " = 0 and " b " is any negative integer .
For either set , this operation has a "right identity " ( which is 1 ) since f( " a" , 1 ) = " a " for all " a " in the set , which is not an "identity " ( two sided identity ) since f(1 , " b" ) ≠ " b " in general .
Division ( / ) , a partial binary operation on the set of real or rational numbers , is not commutative or associative as well .
Tetration( ↑↑ ) , as a binary operation on the natural numbers , is not commutative nor associative and has no identity element .
Binary operations are often written using infix notation such as " a" *"b" , " a " + " b" , " a·b " or ( by juxtaposition with no symbol ) "ab " rather than by functional notation of the form " f" ( " a" , " b" ) .
Powers are usually also written without operator , but with the second argument as superscript .
Binary operations sometimes use prefix or ( probably more often ) postfix notation , both of which dispense with parentheses .
They are also called , respectively , Polish notation and reverse Polish notation .
A binary operation , "ab" , depends on the ordered pair ( "a , b" ) and so ( "ab" )" c " ( where the parentheses here mean first operate on the ordered pair ( " a" , " b" ) and then operate on the result of that using the ordered pair ( ( "ab" ) , " c" ) ) depends in general on the ordered pair ( ( " a" , " b" ) , " c" ) .
Thus , for the general , non-associative case , binary operations can be represented with binary trees .
A binary operation " f " on a set " S" may be viewed as a "ternary " relation on " S" , that is , the set of triples ( " a" , " b" , " f(a,b) " ) in " S" × " S" × " S" for all " a " and " b " in " S" .
An external binary operation is a binary function from " K" × " S" to " S" .
This differs from a binary operation in the strict sense in that " K" need not be " S" ; its elements come from "outside" .
An example of an external binary operation is scalar multiplication in linear algebra .
Here " K" is a field and " S" is a vector space over that field .
An external binary operation may alternatively be viewed as an action ; " K" is acting on " S" .
Note that the dot product of two vectors is not a binary operation , external or otherwise , as it maps from " S" × " S" to " K" , where " K" is a field and " S" is a vector space over " K" .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
The Baroque ( or ) is often thought of as a period of artistic style that used exaggerated motion and clear , easily interpreted detail to produce drama , tension , exuberance , and grandeur in sculpture , painting , architecture , literature , dance , and music .
The style began around 1600 in Rome , Italy and spread to most of Europe .
The popularity and success of the Baroque style was encouraged by the Catholic Church , which had decided at the time of the Council of Trent , in response to the Protestant Reformation , that the arts should communicate religious themes in direct and emotional involvement .
The aristocracy also saw the dramatic style of Baroque architecture and art as a means of impressing visitors and expressing triumph , power and control .
Baroque palaces are built around an entrance of courts , grand staircases and reception rooms of sequentially increasing opulence .
However , 'baroque ' has resonance and application that extend beyond a simple reduction to either style or period .
The word "baroque " is derived from the Portuguese word "barroco" , Spanish "barroco" , or French "baroque" , all of which refer to a "rough or imperfect pearl" , though whether it entered those languages via Latin , Arabic , or some other source is uncertain .
The 1911 " Encyclopædia Britannica " 11th edition thought the term was derived from the Spanish "barrueco" , a large , irregularly-shaped pearl , and that it had for a time been confined to the craft of the jeweller .
Others derive it from the mnemonic term " Baroco" , a supposedly laboured form of syllogism in logical " Scholastica" .
In informal usage , the word "baroque " can simply mean that something is "elaborate" , with many details , without reference to the Baroque styles of the 17th and 18th centuries .
The word " Baroque" , like most periodic or stylistic designations , was invented by later critics rather than practitioners of the arts in the 17th and early 18th centuries .
It is a French transliteration of the Portuguese phrase "pérola barroca" , which means "irregular pearl" , and natural pearls that deviate from the usual , regular forms so they do not have an axis of rotation are known as "baroque pearls " .
The term " Baroque " was initially used in a derogatory sense , to underline the excesses of its emphasis .
In particular , the term was used to describe its eccentric redundancy and noisy abundance of details , which sharply contrasted the clear and sober rationality of the Renaissance .
Although it was long thought that the word as a critical term was first applied to architecture , in fact it appears earlier in reference to music , in an anonymous , satirical review of the première in October 1733 of Jean-Philippe Rameau 's " Hippolyte et Aricie" , printed in the " Mercure de France " in May 1734 .
The critic implied that the novelty in this opera was "du barocque" , complaining that the music lacked coherent melody , was filled with unremitting dissonances , constantly changed key and meter , and speedily ran through every compositional device .
The term " Baroque " may still be used , usually pejoratively , describing works of art , craft , or design that are thought to have excessive ornamentation or complexity of line , or , as a synonym for " Byzantine" , to describe literature , computer software , contracts , or laws that are thought to be excessively complex , indirect , or obscure in language , to the extent of concealing or confusing their meaning .
The word was first rehabilitated by the Swiss-born art historian , Heinrich Wölfflin ( 1864–1945 ) in his " Renaissance und Barock " ( 1888 ) ; Wölfflin identified the Baroque as "movement imported into mass , " an art antithetic to Renaissance art .
He did not make the distinctions between Mannerism and Baroque that modern writers do , and he ignored the later phase , the academic Baroque that lasted into the 18th century .
The Baroque originated around 1600 , several decades after the Council of Trent ( 1545–63 ) , by which the Roman Catholic Church answered many questions of internal reform , addressed the representational arts by demanding that paintings and sculptures in church contexts should speak to the illiterate rather than to the well-informed .
This turn toward a populist conception of the function of ecclesiastical art is seen by many art historians as driving the innovations of Caravaggio and brothers Agostino and Annibale Carracci , all of who were working ( and competing for commissions ) in Rome around 1600 .
The appeal of Baroque style turned consciously from the witty , intellectual qualities of 16th-century Mannerist art to a visceral appeal aimed at the senses .
It employed an iconography that was direct , simple , obvious , and theatrical ( "illustration , right " ) .
Baroque art drew on certain broad and heroic tendencies in Annibale Carracci and his circle , and found inspiration in other artists like Correggio and Caravaggio and Federico Barocci ( "illustration , right " ) , nowadays sometimes termed 'proto-Baroque ' .
Germinal ideas of the Baroque can also be found in the work of Michelangelo .
Some general parallels in music make the expression " Baroque music " useful : there are contrasting phrase lengths , harmony and counterpoint have ousted polyphony , and orchestral color makes a stronger appearance .
Even more generalized parallels perceived by some experts in philosophy , prose style and poetry , are harder to pinpoint .
Though Baroque was superseded in many centers by the Rococo style , beginning in France in the late 1720s , especially for interiors , paintings and the decorative arts , the Baroque style continued to be used in architecture until the advent of Neoclassicism in the later 18th century .
See the Neapolitan palace of Caserta , a Baroque palace ( though in a chaste exterior ) whose construction began in 1752 .
In paintings Baroque gestures are broader than Mannerist gestures : less ambiguous , less arcane and mysterious , more like the stage gestures of opera , a major Baroque art form .
Baroque poses depend on " contrapposto " ( " counterpoise " ) , the tension within the figures that move the planes of shoulders and hips in counterdirections .
The dryer , less dramatic and coloristic , chastened later stages of 18th century Baroque architectural style are often seen as a separate Late Baroque manifestation , for example in buildings by Claude Perrault .
Academic characteristics in the neo-Palladian style , epitomized by William Kent , are a parallel development in Britain and the British colonies : within interiors , Kent 's furniture designs are vividly influenced by the Baroque furniture of Rome and Genoa , hierarchical tectonic sculptural elements , meant never to be moved from their positions , completed the wall decoration .
Baroque is a style of unity imposed upon rich , heavy detail .
The Baroque was defined by Heinrich Wölfflin as the age where the oval replaced the circle as the center of composition , that centralization replaced balance , and that coloristic and "painterly " effects began to become more prominent .
Art historians , often Protestant ones , have traditionally emphasized that the Baroque style evolved during a time in which the Roman Catholic Church had to react against the many revolutionary cultural movements that produced a new science and new forms of religion — Reformation .
It has been said that the monumental Baroque is a style that could give the Papacy , like secular absolute monarchies , a formal , imposing way of expression that could restore its prestige , at the point of becoming somehow symbolic of the Counter-Reformation .
Whether this is the case or not , it was successfully developed in Rome , where Baroque architecture widely renewed the central areas with perhaps the most important urbanistic revision .
The Baroque era is sometimes divided into roughly three phases for convenience :
Late Baroque is also sometimes used synonymously with the succeeding Rococo movement .
A defining statement of what " Baroque " signifies in painting is provided by the series of paintings executed by Peter Paul Rubens for Marie de Medici at the Luxembourg Palace in Paris ( now at the Louvre ) , in which a Catholic painter satisfied a Catholic patron : Baroque-era conceptions of monarchy , iconography , handling of paint , and compositions as well as the depiction of space and movement .
Baroque style featured "exaggerated lighting , intense emotions , release from restraint , and even a kind of artistic sensationalism" .
Baroque art did not really depict the life style of the people at that time ; however , " closely tied to the Counter-Reformation , this style melodramatically reaffirmed the emotional depths of the Catholic faith and glorified both church and monarchy " of their power and influence .
There were highly diverse strands of Italian baroque painting , from Caravaggio to Cortona ; both approaching emotive dynamism with different styles .
Another frequently cited work of Baroque art is Bernini 's " Saint Theresa in Ecstasy " for the Cornaro chapel in Saint Maria della Vittoria , which brings together architecture , sculpture , and theatre into one grand conceit .
The later Baroque style gradually gave way to a more decorative Rococo .
A rather different art developed out of northern realist traditions in 17th century Dutch Golden Age painting , which had very little religious art , and little history painting , instead playing a crucial part in developing secular genres such as still life , genre paintings of everyday scenes , and landscape painting .
While the Baroque nature of Rembrandt 's art is clear , the label is less often used for Vermeer and many other Dutch artists .
Flemish Baroque painting shared a part in this trend , while also continuing to produce the traditional categories .
In a similar way the French classical style of painting exemplified by Poussin is often classed as Baroque , and does share many qualities of the Italian painting of the same period , although the poise and restraint derived from following classical ideas typically give it a very different overall mood .
In Baroque sculpture , groups of figures assumed new importance and there was a dynamic movement and energy of human forms — they spiraled around an empty central vortex , or reached outwards into the surrounding space .
For the first time , Baroque sculpture often had multiple ideal viewing angles .
The characteristic Baroque sculpture added extra-sculptural elements , for example , concealed lighting , or water fountains .
Aleijadinho in Brazil was also one of the great names of baroque sculpture , and his master work is the set of statues of the " Santuário de Bom Jesus de Matosinhos " in Congonhas .
The soapstone sculptures of old testament prophets around the terrace are considered amongst his finest work .
The architecture , sculpture and fountains of Bernini ( 1598–1680 ) give highly charged characteristics of Baroque style .
Bernini was undoubtedly the most important sculptor of the Baroque period .
He approached Michelangelo in his omnicompetence : Bernini sculpted , worked as an architect , painted , wrote plays , and staged spectacles .
In the late 20th century Bernini was most valued for his sculpture , both for his virtuosity in carving marble and his ability to create figures that combine the physical and the spiritual .
He was also a fine sculptor of bust portraits in high demand among the powerful .
A good example of Bernini 's Baroque work is his " St .
Theresa in Ecstasy " ( 1645–52 ) , created for the Cornaro Chapel of the church of Santa Maria della Vittoria , Rome .
Bernini designed the entire chapel , a subsidiary space along the side of the church , for the Cornaro family .
Saint Theresa , the focal point of the chapel , is a soft white marble statue surrounded by a polychromatic marble architectural framing .
This structure conceals a window which lights the statue from above .
Figure-groups of the Cornaro family sculpted in shallow relief inhabit opera boxes on the two side walls of the chapel .
The setting places the viewer as a spectator in front of the statue with the Cornaro family leaning out of their box seats and craning forward to see the mystical ecstasy of the saint .
Theresa is highly idealized and in an imaginary setting .
She was a popular saint of the Catholic Reformation .
She wrote of her mystical experiences for an audience of the nuns of her Carmelite Order ; these writings had become popular reading among lay people interested in spirituality .
In her writings , she described the love of God as piercing her heart like a burning arrow .
Bernini materializes this by placing St . Theresa on a cloud while a Cupid figure holds a golden arrow made of metal and smiles down at her .
The angelic figure is not preparing to plunge the arrow into her heart — rather , he has withdrawn it .
St . Theresa 's face reflects not the anticipation of ecstasy , but her current fulfillment .
This work is widely considered a masterpiece of the Baroque , although the mix of religious and erotic imagery ( faithful to St Teresa 's own written account ) may raise modern eyebrows .
However , Bernini was a devout Catholic and was not attempting to satirize the experience of a chaste nun .
Rather , he aimed to portray religious experience as an intensely physical one .
Theresa described her bodily reaction to spiritual enlightenment in a language of ecstasy used by many mystics , and Bernini 's depiction is earnest .
The Cornaro family promotes itself discreetly in this chapel ; they are represented visually , but are placed on the sides of the chapel , witnessing the event from balconies .
As in an opera house , the Cornaro have a privileged position in respect to the viewer , in their private reserve , closer to the saint ; the viewer , however , has a better view from the front .
They attach their name to the chapel , but St . Theresa is the focus .
It is a private chapel in the sense that no one could say mass on the altar beneath the statue ( in 17th century and probably through the 19th ) without permission from the family , but the only thing that divides the viewer from the image is the altar rail .
The spectacle functions both as a demonstration of mysticism and as a piece of family pride .
In Baroque architecture , new emphasis was placed on bold massing , colonnades , domes , light-and-shade ( "chiaroscuro" ) , 'painterly ' color effects , and the bold play of volume and void .
In interiors , Baroque movement around and through a void informed monumental staircases that had no parallel in previous architecture .
The other Baroque innovation in worldly interiors was the state apartment , a sequence of increasingly rich interiors that culminated in a presence chamber or throne room or a state bedroom .
The sequence of monumental stairs followed by a state apartment was copied in smaller scale everywhere in aristocratic dwellings of any pretensions .
Baroque architecture was taken up with enthusiasm in central Germany ( see , e.g. , Ludwigsburg Palace and Zwinger Dresden ) , Austria and Russia ( see , e.g. , Peterhof ) .
In England the culmination of Baroque architecture was embodied in work by Sir Christopher Wren , Sir John Vanbrugh and Nicholas Hawksmoor , from ca . 1660 to ca . 1725 .
Many examples of Baroque architecture and town planning are found in other European towns , and in Latin America .
Town planning of this period featured radiating avenues intersecting in squares , which took cues from Baroque garden plans .
In Sicily , Baroque developed new shapes and themes as in Noto , Ragusa and Acireale " Basilica di San Sebastiano" .
Another example of Baroque architecture is the Cathedral of Morelia Michoacan in Mexico .
Built in the 17th century by Vincenzo Barrochio , it is one of the many Baroque cathedrals in Mexico .
Baroque churches are also seen in the Philippines , which were built during the Spanish period .
Francis Ching described Baroque architecture as " a style of architecture originating in Italy in the early 17th century and variously prevalent in Europe and the New World for a century and a half , characterized by free and sculptural use of the classical orders and ornament , dynamic opposition and interpenetration of spaces , and the dramatic combined effects of architecture , sculpture , painting , and the decorative arts . "
In theatre , the elaborate conceits , multiplicity of plot turns and a variety of situations characteristic of Mannerism ( Shakespeare 's tragedies , for instance ) were superseded by opera , which drew together all the arts into a unified whole .
Theatre evolved in the Baroque era and became a multimedia experience , starting with the actual architectural space .
In fact , much of the technology used in current Broadway or commercial plays was invented and developed during this era .
The stage could change from a romantic garden to the interior of a palace in a matter of seconds .
The entire space became a framed selected area that only allows the users to see a specific action , hiding all the machinery and technology – mostly ropes and pulleys .
This technology affected the content of the narrated or performed pieces , practicing at its best the Deus ex Machina solution .
Gods were finally able to come down – literally – from the heavens and rescue the hero in the most extreme and dangerous , even absurd situations .
The term Theatrum Mundi – the world is a stage – was also created .
The social and political realm in the real world is manipulated in exactly the same way the actor and the machines are presenting/limiting what is being presented on stage , hiding selectively all the machinery that makes the actions happen .
The films " Vatel " and " Farinelli" give a good idea of the style of productions of the Baroque period .
The American musician William Christie and Les Arts Florissants have performed extensive research on all the French Baroque Opera , performing pieces from Charpentier and Lully , among others that are extremely faithful to the original 17th century creations .
For German Baroque literature , see German literature of the Baroque period .
The term " Baroque " is also used to designate the style of music composed during a period that overlaps with that of Baroque art , but usually encompasses a slightly later period .
It is a still-debated question as to what extent Baroque music shares aesthetic principles with the visual and literary arts of the Baroque period .
A fairly clear , shared element is a love of ornamentation , and it is perhaps significant that the role of ornament was greatly diminished in both music and architecture as the Baroque gave way to the Classical period .
The application of the term " Baroque " to music is a relatively recent development , although it has recently been pointed out that the first use of the word "baroque "
in criticism of any of the arts related to music , in an anonymous , satirical review of the première in October 1733 of Rameau’s " Hippolyte et Aricie , " printed in the " Mercure de France " in May 1734 .
The critic implied that the novelty in this opera was "du barocque , " complaining that the music lacked coherent melody , was filled with unremitting dissonances , constantly changed key and meter , and speedily ran through every compositional device .
However this was an isolated reference , and consistent use was only begun in 1919 , by Curt Sachs , and it was not until 1940 that it was first used in English ( in an article published by Manfred Bukofzer ) .
Many musical forms were born in that era , like the concerto and sinfonia .
Forms such as the sonata , cantata and oratorio flourished .
Also , opera was born out of the experimentation of the Florentine Camerata , the creators of monody , who attempted to recreate the theatrical arts of the Ancient Greeks .
An important technique used in baroque music was the use of ground bass , a repeated bass line .
" Dido 's Lament " by Henry Purcell is a famous example of this technique .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
British may refer to something of , from , or related to the United Kingdom or the island of Great Britain , including :
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Bandwidth is the difference between the upper and lower frequencies in a continuous set of frequencies .
It is typically measured in hertz , and may sometimes refer to "passband bandwidth" , sometimes to "baseband bandwidth" , depending on context .
Passband bandwidth is the difference between the upper and lower cutoff frequencies of , for example , a bandpass filter , a communication channel , or a signal spectrum .
In case of a low-pass filter or baseband signal , the bandwidth is equal to its upper cutoff frequency .
Bandwidth in hertz is a central concept in many fields , including electronics , information theory , digital communications , radio communications , signal processing , and spectroscopy .
A key characteristic of bandwidth is that any band of a given width can carry the same amount of information , regardless of where that band is located in the frequency spectrum .
For example , a 3 kHz band can carry a telephone conversation whether that band is at baseband ( as in a POTS telephone line ) or modulated to some higher frequency .
Bandwidth is a key concept in many telephony applications .
In radio communications , for example , bandwidth is the frequency range occupied by a modulated carrier wave , whereas in optics it is the width of an individual spectral line or the entire spectral range .
In many signal processing contexts , bandwidth is a valuable and limited resource .
For example , an FM radio receiver 's tuner spans a limited range of frequencies .
A government agency ( such as the Federal Communications Commission in the United States ) may apportion the regionally available bandwidth to broadcast license holders so that their signals do not mutually interfere .
Each transmitter owns a slice of bandwidth , a valuable ( if intangible ) commodity .
For different applications there are different precise definitions .
For example , one definition of bandwidth could be the range of frequencies beyond which the frequency function is zero .
This would correspond to the mathematical notion of the support of a function ( i .e . , the total "length " of values for which the function is nonzero ) .
A less strict and more practically useful definition will refer to the frequencies where the frequency function is " small" .
Small could mean less than 3 dB below ( i .e . , power output < 1/2 or voltage output < formula_1 0.707 of ) the maximum value , or more rarely 10 dB below , or it could mean below a certain absolute value .
As with any definition of the "width " of a function , many definitions are suitable for different purposes .
Bandwidth typically refers to baseband bandwidth in the context of , for example , sampling theorem and Nyquist sampling rate , while it refers to passband bandwidth in the context of Nyquist symbol rate or Shannon-Hartley channel capacity for communication systems .
In some contexts , the signal bandwidth in hertz refers to the frequency range in which the signal 's spectral density ( in W/Hz or V2/Hz ) is nonzero or above a small threshold value .
That definition is used in calculations of the lowest sampling rate that will satisfy the sampling theorem .
The threshold value is often defined relative to the maximum value , and is most commonly the 3dB-point , that is the point where the spectral density is half its maximum value ( or the spectral amplitude , in V or V/Hz , is more than 70.7 % of its maximum ) .
The word bandwidth applies to signals as described above , but it could also apply to " systems " , for example filters or communication channels .
To say that a system has a certain bandwidth means that the system can process signals of that bandwidth , or that the system reduces the bandwidth of a white noise input to that bandwidth .
The 3 dB bandwidth of an electronic filter or communication channel is the part of the system 's frequency response that lies within 3 dB of the response at its peak , which in the passband filter case is typically at or near its center frequency , and in the lowpass filter is near 0 hertz .
If the maximum gain is 0 dB , the 3 dB gain is the range where the gain is more than −3dB , or the attenuation is less than +3dB.
This is also the range of frequencies where the amplitude gain is above 70.7 % of the maximum amplitude gain , and above half the maximum power gain .
This same "half power gain " convention is also used in spectral width , and more generally for extent of functions as full width at half maximum ( FWHM) .
In electronic filter design , a filter specification may require that within the filter passband , the gain is nominally 0 dB ± a small number of dB , for example within the ±1 dB interval .
In the stopband( s ) , the required attenuation in dB is above a certain level , for example >100 dB.
In a transition band the gain is not specified .
In this case , the filter bandwidth corresponds to the passband width , which in this example is the 1dB-bandwidth .
If the filter shows amplitude ripple within the passband , the x dB point refers to the point where the gain is x dB below the nominal passband gain rather than x dB below the maximum gain .
This is the bandwidth of a device divided by its center frequency .
E.g. , a passband filter that has a bandwidth of 2 MHz with center frequency 10 MHz will have a fractional bandwidth of 2/10 , or 20 % .
In communication systems , in calculations of the Shannon– Hartley channel capacity , bandwidth refers to the 3dB-bandwidth .
In calculations of the maximum symbol rate , the Nyquist sampling rate , and maximum bit rate according to the Hartley formula , the bandwidth refers to the frequency range within which the gain is non-zero , or the gain in dB is below a very large value .
The fact that in equivalent baseband models of communication systems , the signal spectrum consists of both negative and positive frequencies , can lead to confusion about bandwidth , since they are sometimes referred to only by the positive half , and one will occasionally see expressions such as formula_2 , where formula_3 is the total bandwidth ( i .e . the maximum passband bandwidth of the carrier-modulated RF signal and the minimum passband bandwidth of the physical passband channel ) , and formula_4 is the positive bandwidth ( the baseband bandwidth of the equivalent channel model ) .
For instance , the baseband model of the signal would require a lowpass filter with cutoff frequency of at least formula_4 to stay intact , and the physical passband channel would require a passband filter of at least formula_3 to stay intact .
In signal processing and control theory the bandwidth is the frequency at which the closed-loop system gain drops 3 dB below peak .
In basic electric circuit theory , when studying band-pass and band-reject filters , the bandwidth represents the distance between the two points in the frequency domain where the signal is formula_7 of the maximum signal amplitude ( half power ) .
In the field of antennas , two different methods of expressing relative bandwidth are used for narrowband and wideband antennas .
For either , a set of criteria is established to define the extents of the bandwidth , such as input impedance , pattern , or polarization .
" Percent bandwidth" , usually used for narrowband antennas , is used defined as formula_8 .
The theoretical limit to percent bandwidth is 200 % , which occurs for formula_9 .
" Fractional bandwidth or Ratio bandwidth" , usually used for wideband antennas , is defined as formula_10 and is typically presented in the form of formula_11 .
Fractional bandwidth is used for wideband antennas because of the compression of the percent bandwidth that occurs mathematically with percent bandwidths above 100 % , which corresponds to a fractional bandwidth of 3:1.
In photonics , the term "bandwidth " occurs in a variety of meanings :
A related concept is the spectral linewidth of the radiation emitted by excited atoms .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Benjamin Franklin ( April 17 , 1790 ) was one of the Founding Fathers of the United States and in many ways was " the First American " .
A world-renowned polymath , Franklin was a leading author , printer , political theorist , politician , postmaster , scientist , inventor , civic activist , statesman , and diplomat .
As a scientist , he was a major figure in the American Enlightenment and the history of physics for his discoveries and theories regarding electricity .
As an inventor , he is known for the lightning rod , bifocals , and the Franklin stove , among other inventions .
He facilitated many civic organizations , including Philadelphia 's fire department and a university .
Franklin earned the title of " The First American " for his early and indefatigable campaigning for colonial unity ; as an author and spokesman in London for several colonies , then as the first United States Ambassador to France , he exemplified the emerging American nation .
Franklin was foundational in defining the American ethos as a marriage of the practical values of thrift , hard work , education , community spirit , self-governing institutions , and opposition to authoritarianism both political and religious , with the scientific and tolerant values of the Enlightenment .
In the words of historian Henry Steele Commager , " In a Franklin could be merged the virtues of Puritanism without its defects , the illumination of the Enlightenment without its heat . "
To Walter Isaacson , this makes Franklin " the most accomplished American of his age and the most influential in inventing the type of society America would become . "
Franklin , always proud of his working class roots , became a successful newspaper editor and printer in Philadelphia , the leading city in the colonies .
With two partners he published the " Pennsylvania Chronicle , " a newspaper that was known for its revolutionary sentiments and criticisms of the British policies .
He became wealthy publishing " Poor Richard 's Almanack " and " The Pennsylvania Gazette" .
Franklin was also the printer of books for the Moravians of Bethlehem , Pennsylvania ( 1742 on ) .
Franklin 's printed Moravian books ( printed in German ) are preserved , and can be viewed , at the Moravian Archives located in Bethlehem .
Franklin visited Bethlehem many times and stayed at the Moravian Sun Inn .
He played a major role in establishing the University of Pennsylvania and was elected the first president of the American Philosophical Society .
Franklin became a national hero in America when as agent for several colonies he spearheaded the effort to have Parliament in London repeal the unpopular Stamp Act .
An accomplished diplomat , he was widely admired among the French as American minister to Paris and was a major figure in the development of positive Franco-American relations .
His efforts to secure support for the American Revolution by shipments of crucial munitions proved vital for the American war effort .
For many years he was the British postmaster for the colonies , which enabled him to set up the first national communications network .
He was active in community affairs , colonial and state politics , as well as national and international affairs .
From 1785 to 1788 , he served as governor of Pennsylvania .
Toward the end of his life , he freed his own slaves and became one of the most prominent abolitionists .
His colorful life and legacy of scientific and political achievement , and status as one of America 's most influential Founding Fathers , have seen Franklin honored on coinage and the $ 100 bill ; warships , the names of many towns , counties , educational institutions , namesakes , and companies , and , more than two centuries after his death , countless cultural references .
Benjamin Franklin was born on Milk Street , in Boston , Massachusetts , on January 17 , 1706 , and baptized at Old South Meeting House .
He was one of ten children born to Josiah Franklin with his second wife Abiah Folger .
Among Benjamin 's siblings were his older brother James and his younger sister Jane .
Josiah wanted Ben to attend school with the clergy , but only had enough money to send him to school for two years .
He attended Boston Latin School but did not graduate ; he continued his education through voracious reading .
Although "his parents talked of the church as a career " for Franklin , his schooling ended when he was ten .
He worked for his father for a time , and at 12 he became an apprentice to his brother James , a printer , who taught Ben the printing trade .
When Ben was 15 , James founded " The New-England Courant" , which was the first truly independent newspaper in the colonies .
When denied the chance to write a letter to the paper for publication , Franklin adopted the pseudonym of " Mrs .
Dogood " 's letters were published , and became a subject of conversation around town .
Neither James nor the " Courant " 's readers were aware of the ruse , and James was unhappy with Ben when he discovered the popular correspondent was his younger brother .
Franklin was an advocate of free speech from an early age .
When his brother was jailed for three weeks in 1722 for publishing material unflattering to the governor , young Franklin took over the newspaper and had Mrs Dogwood (quoting " Cato 's Letters " ) proclaim : " Without freedom of thought there can be no such thing as wisdom and no such thing as public liberty without freedom of speech . "
Franklin left his apprenticeship without his brother 's permission , and in so doing became a fugitive .
At age 17 , Franklin ran away to Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , seeking a new start in a new city .
When he first arrived , he worked in several printer shops around town , but he was not satisfied by the immediate prospects .
After a few months , while working in a printing house , Franklin was convinced by Pennsylvania Governor Sir William Keith to go to London , ostensibly to acquire the equipment necessary for establishing another newspaper in Philadelphia .
Finding Keith 's promises of backing a newspaper empty , Franklin worked as a typesetter in a printer 's shop in what is now the Church of St Bartholomew-the-Great in the Smithfield area of London .
Following this , he returned to Philadelphia in 1726 with the help of Thomas Denham , a merchant who employed Franklin as clerk , shopkeeper , and bookkeeper in his business .
In 1727 , Benjamin Franklin , then 21 , created the Junto , a group of "like minded aspiring artisans and tradesmen who hoped to improve themselves while they improved their community . "
The Junto was a discussion group for issues of the day ; it subsequently gave rise to many organizations in Philadelphia .
Reading was a great pastime of the Junto , but books were rare and expensive .
The members created a library , initially assembled from their own books .
Franklin conceived the idea of a subscription library , which would pool the funds of the members to buy books for all to read .
This was the birth of the Library Company of Philadelphia : its charter was composed by Franklin in 1731 .
In 1732 , Franklin hired the first American librarian , Louis Timothee .
Originally , the books were kept in the homes of the first librarians , but in 1739 the collection was moved to the second floor of the State House of Pennsylvania , now known as Independence Hall .
In 1791 , a new building was built specifically for the library .
The Library Company is now a great scholarly and research library with 500,000 rare books , pamphlets , and broadsides , more than 160,000 manuscripts , and 75,000 graphic items .
Upon Denham 's death , Franklin returned to his former trade .
In 1728 , Franklin had set up a printing house in partnership with Hugh Meredith ; the following year he became the publisher of a newspaper called " The Pennsylvania Gazette" .
The " Gazette " gave Franklin a forum for agitation about a variety of local reforms and initiatives through printed essays and observations .
Over time , his commentary , and his adroit cultivation of a positive image as an industrious and intellectual young man , earned him a great deal of social respect .
But even after Franklin had achieved fame as a scientist and statesman , he habitually signed his letters with the unpretentious 'B .
In 1732 , Ben Franklin published the first German language newspaper in America – " the Philadelphische Zeitung " – although it failed after only one year , because four other newly founded German papers quickly dominated the newspaper market .
Franklin saw the printing press as a device to instruct colonial Americans in moral virtue .
Frasca argues he saw this as a service to God , because he understood moral virtue in terms of actions , thus , doing good provides a service to God .
Despite his own moral lapses , Franklin saw himself as uniquely qualified to instruct Americans in morality .
He tried to influence American moral life through construction of a printing network based on a chain of partnerships from the Carolinas to New England .
It was more than a business venture , for like many publishers since , he believed that the press had a public-service duty .
When Franklin established himself in Philadelphia , shortly before 1730 , the town boasted two "wretched little " news sheets , Andrew Bradford 's " American Mercury" , and Keimer 's " Universal Instructor in all Arts and Sciences , and Pennsylvania Gazette" .
This instruction in all arts and sciences consisted of weekly extracts from " Chambers 's Universal Dictionary " .
Franklin quickly did away with all this when he took over the " Instructor " and made it " The Pennsylvania Gazette" .
The " Gazette " soon became Franklin 's characteristic organ , which he freely used for satire , for the play of his wit , even for sheer excess of mischief or of fun .
From the first he had a way of adapting his models to his own uses .
The series of essays called " The Busy-Body" , which he wrote for Bradford 's " American Mercury " in 1729 , followed the general Addisonian form , already modified to suit homelier conditions .
The thrifty Patience , in her busy little shop , complaining of the useless visitors who waste her valuable time , is related to the ladies who address Mr. Spectator .
The Busy-Body himself is a true Censor Morum , as Isaac Bickerstaff had been in the " Tatler " .
And a number of the fictitious characters , Ridentius , Eugenius , Cato , and Cretico , represent traditional 18th-century classicism .
Even this Franklin could use for contemporary satire , since Cretico , the " sowre Philosopher" , is evidently a portrait of Franklin 's rival , Samuel Keimer .
As time went on , Franklin depended less on his literary conventions , and more on his own native humor .
In this there is a new spirit—not suggested to him by the fine breeding of Addison , or the bitter irony of Swift , or the stinging completeness of Pope .
The brilliant little pieces Franklin wrote for his " Pennsylvania Gazette " have an imperishable place in American literature .
The " Pennsylvania Gazette" , like most other newspapers of the period , was often poorly printed .
Franklin was busy with a hundred matters outside of his printing office , and never seriously attempted to raise the mechanical standards of his trade .
Nor did he ever properly edit or collate the chance medley of stale items that passed for news in the " Gazette . "
His influence on the practical side of journalism was minimal .
On the other hand , his advertisements of books show his very great interest in popularizing secular literature .
Undoubtedly his paper contributed to the broader culture that distinguished Pennsylvania from her neighbors before the Revolution .
Like many publishers , Franklin built up a book shop in his printing office ; he took the opportunity to read new books before selling them .
Franklin had mixed success in his plan to establish an inter-colonial network of newspapers that would produce a profit for him and disseminate virtue .
He began in Charleston , South Carolina , in 1731 .
After the second editor died , his widow Elizabeth Timothy took over and made it a success , 1738–46 .
She was one of the colonial era 's first woman printers .
For three decades Franklin maintained a close business relationship with her and her son Peter who took over in 1746 .
The " Gazette " had a policy of impartiality in political debates , while creating the opportunity for public debate , which encouraged others to challenge authority .
Editor Peter Timothy avoided blandness and crude bias , and after 1765 increasingly took a patriotic stand in the growing crisis with Great Britain .
In 1731 , Franklin was initiated into the local Masonic Lodge .
He became Grand Master in 1734 , indicating his rapid rise to prominence in Pennsylvania .
That same year , he edited and published the first Masonic book in the Americas , a reprint of James Anderson 's " Constitutions of the Free-Masons " .
Franklin remained a Freemason for the rest of his life .
In 1723 , at the age of 17 , Franklin proposed to 15-year-old Deborah Read while a boarder in the Read home .
At that time , Read 's mother was wary of allowing her young daughter to marry Franklin , who was on his way to London at Governor Sir William Keith 's request , and also because of his financial instability .
Her own husband had recently died , and Mrs. Read declined Franklin 's request to marry her daughter .
While Franklin was in London , his trip was extended , and there were problems with Sir William 's promises of support .
Perhaps because of the circumstances of this delay , Deborah married a man named John Rodgers .
Rodgers shortly avoided his debts and prosecution by fleeing to Barbados with her dowry , leaving Deborah behind .
Rodgers 's fate was unknown , and because of bigamy laws , Deborah was not free to remarry .
Franklin established a common-law marriage with Deborah Read on September 1 , 1730 .
They took in Franklin 's young , recently acknowledged illegitimate son , William , and raised him in their household .
The first , Francis Folger Franklin , born October 1732 , died of smallpox in 1736 .
Their second child , Sarah Franklin , familiarly called Sally , was born in 1743 .
She eventually married Richard Bache , had seven children , and cared for her father in his old age .
Deborah 's fear of the sea meant that she never accompanied Franklin on any of his extended trips to Europe , despite his repeated requests .
She wrote to him in November 1769 saying she was ill due to "dissatisfied distress " from his prolonged absence , but he did not return until his business was done .
Deborah Read Franklin died of a stroke in 1774 , while Franklin was on an extended mission to England ; he returned in 1775 .
In 1730 , at the age of 24 , Franklin publicly acknowledged an illegitimate son named William , and raised him in his household .
Beginning at about age 30 , William studied law in London in the early 1760s .
He fathered an illegitimate son , William Franklin , born February 22 , 1762 .
The boy 's mother was never identified , and he was placed in foster care .
Franklin later that year married Elizabeth Downes , daughter of a planter from Barbados .
After William passed the bar , his father helped him gain an appointment in 1763 as the last Royal Governor of New Jersey .
A Loyalist , William and his father eventually broke relations over their differences about the American Revolutionary War .
The elder Franklin could never accept William 's position .
Deposed in 1776 by the revolutionary government of New Jersey and imprisoned for a time , the younger Franklin went to New York in 1782 , which was still occupied by British troops .
He became leader of the Board of Associated Loyalists—a quasi-military organization , headquartered in New York City .
They initiated guerrilla forays into New Jersey , southern Connecticut , and New York counties north of the city .
When British troops evacuated from New York , William Franklin left with them and sailed to England .
He settled in London , never to return to North America .
In the preliminary peace talks in 1782 with Britain , " ... Benjamin Franklin insisted that loyalists who had borne arms against the United States would be excluded from this plea ( that they be given a general pardon ) .
Benjamin Franklin found out about Temple ( as he called him ) , his only patrilineal grandson , on his second mission to England .
He got to know the boy and became fond of him , arranging for his education .
He never told his wife Deborah about him .
Franklin gained custody and brought Temple with him upon return to Philadelphia in 1775 .
Beginning at age 16 , Temple Franklin served as secretary to his grandfather during his mission to Paris during the Revolutionary War .
Although he returned to the United States with his grandfather in the 1780s , he could not find an appointment .
He returned to Europe , living for a time in England and then in France .
He died in Paris in 1823 and was buried in Père Lachaise Cemetery .
In 1758 , the year he ceased writing for the Almanack , he printed " Father Abraham 's Sermon" , also known as " The Way to Wealth" .
Franklin 's autobiography , begun in 1771 but published after his death , has become one of the classics of the genre .
Daylight saving time ( DST ) is often erroneously attributed to a 1784 satire that Franklin published anonymously .
Modern DST was first proposed by George Vernon Hudson in 1895 .
Among his many creations were the lightning rod , glass armonica ( a glass instrument , not to be confused with the metal harmonica ) , Franklin stove , bifocal glasses and the flexible urinary catheter .
Franklin never patented his inventions ; in his autobiography he wrote , " ... as we enjoy great advantages from the inventions of others , we should be glad of an opportunity to serve others by any invention of ours ; and this we should do freely and generously . "
His inventions also included social innovations , such as paying forward .
Franklin 's fascination with innovation could be viewed as altruistic ; he wrote that his scientific works were to be used for increasing efficiency and human improvement .
One such improvement was his effort to expedite news services through his printing presses .
Franklin had a major influence on the emerging science of demography , or population studies .
Thomas Malthus is noted for his rule of population growth and credited Franklin for discovering it .
Kammen ( 1990 ) and Drake ( 2011 ) say Franklin 's " Observations on the Increase of Mankind " ( 1755 ) stands alongside Ezra Stiles ' " Discourse on Christian Union " ( 1760 ) as the leading works of eighteenth century Anglo-American demography ; Drake credits Franklin 's "wide readership and prophetic insight . "
In the 1730s and 1740s , Franklin began taking notes on population growth , finding that the American population had the fastest growth rates on earth .
Emphasizing that population growth depended on food supplies—a line of thought later developed by Thomas Malthus— Franklin emphasized the abundance of food and available farmland in America .
He calculated that America 's population was doubling every twenty years and would surpass that of England in a century .
In 1751 , he drafted " Observations concerning the Increase of Mankind , Peopling of Countries , &c . "
Four years later , it was anonymously printed in Boston , and it was quickly reproduced in Britain , where it influenced the economists Adam Smith and later Thomas Malthus .
Franklin 's predictions alarmed British leaders who did not want to be surpassed by the colonies , so they became more willing to impose restrictions on the colonial economy .
Franklin was also a pioneer in the study of slave demography , as shown in his 1755 essay .
As deputy postmaster , Franklin became interested in the North Atlantic Ocean circulation patterns .
While in England in 1768 , he heard a complaint from the Colonial Board of Customs : Why did it take British packet ships carrying mail several weeks longer to reach New York than it took an average merchant ship to reach Newport , Rhode Island ?
The merchantmen had a longer and more complex voyage because they left from London , while the packets left from Falmouth in Cornwall .
Franklin put the question to his cousin Timothy Folger , a Nantucket whaler captain , who told him that merchant ships routinely avoided a strong eastbound mid-ocean current .
The mail packet captains sailed dead into it , thus fighting an adverse current of .
Franklin worked with Folger and other experienced ship captains , learning enough to chart the current and name it the Gulf Stream , by which it is still known today .
Franklin published his Gulf Stream chart in 1770 in England , where it was completely ignored .
Subsequent versions were printed in France in 1778 and the U.S. in 1786 .
The British edition of the chart , which was the original , was so thoroughly ignored that everyone assumed it was lost forever until Phil Richardson , a Woods Hole oceanographer and Gulf Stream expert , discovered it in the Bibliothèque Nationale in Paris in 1980 .
This find received front page coverage in the " New York Times " .
It took many years for British sea captains to adopt Franklin 's advice on navigating the current ; once they did , they were able to trim two weeks from their sailing time .
In 1853 , the oceanographer and cartographer Matthew Fontaine Maury noted that Franklin only charted and codified the Gulf Stream , he did not "discover " it :
His discoveries resulted from his investigations of electricity .
Franklin proposed that "vitreous " and "resinous " electricity were not different types of "electrical fluid " ( as electricity was called then ) , but the same electrical fluid under different pressures .
He was the first to label them as positive and negative respectively , and he was the first to discover the principle of conservation of charge .
In 1750 he published a proposal for an experiment to prove that lightning is electricity by flying a kite in a storm that appeared capable of becoming a lightning storm .
On May 10 , 1752 , Thomas-François Dalibard of France conducted Franklin 's experiment using a iron rod instead of a kite , and he extracted electrical sparks from a cloud .
On June 15 Franklin may possibly have conducted his well known kite experiment in Philadelphia , successfully extracting sparks from a cloud .
Franklin 's experiment was not written up with credit until Joseph Priestley 's 1767 " History and Present Status of Electricity " ; the evidence shows that Franklin was insulated ( not in a conducting path , where he would have been in danger of electrocution ) .
Others , such as Prof. Georg Wilhelm Richmann , were indeed electrocuted during the months following Franklin 's experiment .
In his writings , Franklin indicates that he was aware of the dangers and offered alternative ways to demonstrate that lightning was electrical , as shown by his use of the concept of electrical ground .
If Franklin did perform this experiment , he may not have done it in the way that is often described—flying the kite and waiting to be struck by lightning—as it would have been dangerous .
Instead he used the kite to collect some electric charge from a storm cloud , which implied that lightning was electrical .
On October 19 in a letter to England with directions for repeating the experiment , Franklin wrote :
Franklin 's electrical experiments led to his invention of the lightning rod .
He noted that conductors with a sharp rather than a smooth point could discharge silently , and at a far greater distance .
He surmised that this could help protect buildings from lightning by attaching "upright Rods of Iron , made sharp as a Needle and gilt to prevent Rusting , and from the Foot of those Rods a Wire down the outside of the Building into the Ground ; ... Would not these pointed Rods probably draw the Electrical Fire silently out of a Cloud before it came nigh enough to strike , and thereby secure us from that most sudden and terrible Mischief ! "
Following a series of experiments on Franklin 's own house , lightning rods were installed on the Academy of Philadelphia ( later the University of Pennsylvania ) and the Pennsylvania State House ( later Independence Hall ) in 1752 .
In recognition of his work with electricity , Franklin received the Royal Society 's Copley Medal in 1753 , and in 1756 he became one of the few 18th-century Americans elected as a Fellow of the Society .
The cgs unit of electric charge has been named after him : one "franklin " ( Fr ) is equal to one statcoulomb .
Franklin was , along with his contemporary Leonhard Euler , the only major scientist who supported Christiaan Huygens ' wave theory of light , which was basically ignored by the rest of the scientific community .
In the 18th century Newton 's corpuscular theory was held to be true ; only after Young 's well known slit experiment in 1803 were most scientists persuaded to believe Huygens ' theory .
On October21 , 1743 , according to popular myth , a storm moving from the southwest denied Franklin the opportunity of witnessing a lunar eclipse .
Franklin was said to have noted that the prevailing winds were actually from the northeast , contrary to what he had expected .
In correspondence with his brother , Franklin learned that the same storm had not reached Boston until after the eclipse , despite the fact that Boston is to the northeast of Philadelphia .
He deduced that storms do not always travel in the direction of the prevailing wind , a concept that greatly influenced meteorology .
After the Icelandic volcanic eruption of Laki in 1783 , and the subsequent harsh European winter of 1784 , Franklin made observations connecting the causal nature of these two separate events .
He wrote about them in a lecture series .
Though Benjamin Franklin has been most noted kite-wise with his lightning experiments , he has also been noted by many for his using kites to pull humans and ships across waterways .
The George Pocock in the book " A TREATISE on The Aeropleustic Art , or Navigation in the Air , by means of Kites , or Buoyant Sails " noted being inspired by Benjamin Franklin 's traction of his body by kite power across a waterway .
In his later years he suggested using the technique for pulling ships .
Franklin noted a principle of refrigeration by observing that on a very hot day , he stayed cooler in a wet shirt in a breeze than he did in a dry one .
To understand this phenomenon more clearly Franklin conducted experiments .
In 1758 on a warm day in Cambridge , England , Franklin and fellow scientist John Hadley experimented by continually wetting the ball of a mercury thermometer with ether and using bellows to evaporate the ether .
With each subsequent evaporation , the thermometer read a lower temperature , eventually reaching .
Another thermometer showed that the room temperature was constant at .
In his letter " Cooling by Evaporation , " Franklin noted that , " One may see the possibility of freezing a man to death on a warm summer 's day . "
According to Michael Faraday , Franklin 's experiments on the non-conduction of ice are worth mentioning , although the law of the general effect of liquefaction on electrolytes is not attributed to Franklin .
However , as reported in 1836 by Prof. A. D. Bache of the University of Pennsylvania , the law of the effect of heat on the conduction of bodies otherwise non-conductors , for example , glass , could be attributed to Franklin .
Franklin writes , " ... A certain quantity of heat will make some bodies good conductors , that will not otherwise conduct .. . " and again , " ... And water , though naturally a good conductor , will not conduct well when frozen into ice . "
An aging Franklin accumulated all his oceanographic findings in " Maritime Observations " , published by the Philosophical Society 's " transactions " in 1786 .
It contained ideas for sea anchors , catamaran hulls , watertight compartments , shipboard lightning rods and a soup bowl designed to stay stable in stormy weather .
In a 1772 letter to Joseph Priestley , Franklin lays out the earliest known description of the Pro & Con list , a common decision-making technique :
... my Way is , to divide half a Sheet of Paper by a Line into two Columns , writing over the one Pro , and over the other Con .
Then during three or four Days Consideration I put down under the different Heads short Hints of the different Motives that at different Times occur to me for or against the Measure .
When I have thus got them all together in one View , I endeavour to estimate their respective Weights ; and where I find two , one on each side , that seem equal , I strike them both out : If I find a Reason pro equal to some two Reasons con , I strike out the three .
If I judge some two Reasons con equal to some three Reasons pro , I strike out the five ; and thus proceeding I find at length where the Ballance lies ; and if after a Day or two of farther Consideration nothing new that is of Importance occurs on either side , I come to a Determination accordingly .
Franklin is known to have played the violin , the harp , and the guitar .
He also composed music , notably a string quartet in early classical style .
He developed a much-improved version of the glass harmonica , in which the glasses rotate on a shaft , with the player 's fingers held steady , instead of the other way around ; this version soon found its way to Europe .
He was playing chess by around 1733 , making him the first chess player known by name in the American colonies .
His essay on " The Morals of Chess " in " Columbian " magazine in December 1786 is the second known writing on chess in America .
This essay in praise of chess and prescribing a code of behavior for the game has been widely reprinted and translated .
He and a friend also used chess as a means of learning the Italian language , which both were studying ; the winner of each game between them had the right to assign a task , such as parts of the Italian grammar to be learned by heart , to be performed by the loser before their next meeting .
Franklin was inducted into the U.S. Chess Hall of Fame in 1999 .
In 1736 , Franklin created the Union Fire Company , one of the first volunteer firefighting companies in America .
In the same year , he printed a new currency for New Jersey based on innovative anti-counterfeiting techniques he had devised .
Throughout his career , Franklin was an advocate for paper money , publishing " A Modest Enquiry into the Nature and Necessity of a Paper Currency " in 1729 , and his printer printed money .
He was influential in the more restrained and thus successful monetary experiments in the Middle Colonies , which stopped deflation without causing excessive inflation .
In 1766 he made a case for paper money to the British House of Commons .
As he matured , Franklin began to concern himself more with public affairs .
In 1743 , he set forth a scheme for The Academy , Charity School , and College of Philadelphia .
He was appointed president of the Academy on November 13 , 1749 ; the Academy and the Charity School opened on August 13 , 1751 .
In 1743 , Franklin founded the American Philosophical Society to help scientific men discuss their discoveries and theories .
He began the electrical research that , along with other scientific inquiries , would occupy him for the rest of his life , in between bouts of politics and moneymaking .
In 1747 , he retired from printing and went into other businesses .
He created a partnership with his foreman , David Hall , which provided Franklin with half of the shop 's profits for 18 years .
This lucrative business arrangement provided leisure time for study , and in a few years he had made discoveries that gave him a reputation with educated persons throughout Europe and especially in France .
Franklin became involved in Philadelphia politics and rapidly progressed .
In October 1748 , he was selected as a councilman , in June 1749 he became a Justice of the Peace for Philadelphia , and in 1751 he was elected to the Pennsylvania Assembly .
On August 10 , 1753 , Franklin was appointed joint deputy postmaster-general of North America .
His most notable service in domestic politics was his reform of the postal system , with mail sent out every week .
In 1751 , Franklin and Dr. Thomas Bond obtained a charter from the Pennsylvania legislature to establish a hospital .
Pennsylvania Hospital was the first hospital in what was to become the United States of America .
Between 1750 and 1753 , the "educational triumvirate " of Dr. Benjamin Franklin , the American Dr. Samuel Johnson of Stratford , Connecticut , and the immigrant Scottish schoolteacher Dr. William Smith built on Franklin 's initial scheme and created what Bishop James Madison , president of the College of William & Mary , called a "new-model " plan or style of American college .
Franklin solicited , printed in 1752 , and promoted an American textbook of moral philosophy from the American Dr. Samuel Johnson titled " Elementa Philosophica " to be taught in the new colleges to replace courses in denominational divinity .
In June 1753 , Johnson , Franklin , and Smith met in Stratford .
They decided the new-model college would focus on the professions , with classes taught in English instead of Latin , have subject matter experts as professors instead of one tutor leading a class for four years , and there would be no religious test for admission .
Johnson went on to found King 's College ( now Columbia University ) in New York City in 1754 , while Franklin hired William Smith as Provost of the College of Philadelphia , which opened in 1755 .
At its first commencement , on May 17 , 1757 , seven men graduated ; six with a Bachelor of Arts and one as Master of Arts .
It was later merged with the University of the State of Pennsylvania to become the University of Pennsylvania .
The College was to become influential in guiding the founding documents of the United States : in the Continental Congress , for example , over one third of the college-affiliated men who contributed the " Declaration of Independence " between September 4 , 1774 , and July 4 , 1776 , were affiliated with the College .
In 1753 , both Harvard University and Yale University awarded him honorary degrees .
In 1754 , he headed the Pennsylvania delegation to the Albany Congress .
This meeting of several colonies had been requested by the Board of Trade in England to improve relations with the Indians and defense against the French .
Franklin proposed a broad Plan of Union for the colonies .
While the plan was not adopted , elements of it found their way into the Articles of Confederation and the Constitution .
In 1756 , Franklin organized the Pennsylvania Militia ( see " Associated Regiment of Philadelphia " under heading of Pennsylvania 's 103rd Artillery and 111th Infantry Regiment at Continental Army ) .
He used Tun Tavern as a gathering place to recruit a regiment of soldiers to go into battle against the Native American uprisings that beset the American colonies .
Reportedly Franklin was elected " Colonel " of the Associated Regiment but declined the honor .
Also in 1756 , Franklin became a member of the Society for the Encouragement of Arts , Manufactures & Commerce ( now the Royal Society of Arts or RSA , which had been founded in 1754) , whose early meetings took place in coffee shops in London 's Covent Garden district , close to Franklin 's main residence in Craven Street during his missions to England .
The Craven street residence , which he used on various lengthy missions from 1757 to 1775 , is the only one of his residences to survive .
It opened to the public as the Benjamin Franklin House museum on January 17 , 2006 .
After his return to the United States in 1775 , Franklin became the Society 's Corresponding Member and remained closely connected with the Society .
The RSA instituted a Benjamin Franklin Medal in 1956 to commemorate the 250th anniversary of Franklin 's birth and the 200th anniversary of his membership of the RSA .
In 1757 , he was sent to England by the Pennsylvania Assembly as a colonial agent to protest against the political influence of the Penn family , the proprietors of the colony .
He remained there for five years , striving to end the proprietors ' prerogative to overturn legislation from the elected Assembly , and their exemption from paying taxes on their land .
His lack of influential allies in Whitehall led to the failure of this mission .
Whilst in London , Franklin became involved in radical politics .
He was a member of the Club of Honest Whigs , alongside thinkers such as Richard Price , the minister of Newington Green Unitarian Church who ignited the Revolution Controversy .
During his stays at Craven Street between 1757 and 1775 , Franklin developed a close friendship with his landlady , Margaret Stevenson , and her circle of friends and relations , in particular her daughter Mary , who was more often known as Polly .
In 1759 , he visited Edinburgh with his son , and recalled his conversations there as " the "densest " happiness of my life " .
In February 1759 , the University of St Andrews awarded him an Honorary Doctor of Laws degree , and in October of the same year he was granted Freedom of the Borough of St Andrews .
In 1762 , Oxford University awarded Franklin an honorary doctorate for his scientific accomplishments ; from then on he went by " Doctor Franklin " .
He also managed to secure an appointed post for his illegitimate son , William Franklin , by then an attorney , as Colonial Governor of New Jersey .
He joined the influential Lunar Society of Birmingham , with whom he regularly corresponded and , on occasion , visited in Birmingham .
At this time , many members of the Pennsylvania Assembly were feuding with William Penn 's heirs , who controlled the colony as proprietors .
After his return to the colony , Franklin led the "anti-proprietary party " in the struggle against the Penn family , and was elected Speaker of the Pennsylvania House in May 1764 .
His call for a change from proprietary to royal government was a rare political miscalculation , however : Pennsylvanians worried that such a move would endanger their political and religious freedoms .
Because of these fears , and because of political attacks on his character , Franklin lost his seat in the October 1764 Assembly elections .
The anti-proprietary party dispatched Franklin to England again to continue the struggle against the Penn family proprietorship .
During this trip , events drastically changed the nature of his mission .
In London , Franklin opposed the 1765 Stamp Act .
Unable to prevent its passage , he made another political miscalculation and recommended a friend to the post of stamp distributor for Pennsylvania .
Pennsylvanians were outraged , believing that he had supported the measure all along , and threatened to destroy his home in Philadelphia .
Franklin soon learned of the extent of colonial resistance to the Stamp Act , and he testified during the House of Commons proceedings that led to its repeal .
With this , Franklin suddenly emerged as the leading spokesman for American interests in England .
He wrote popular essays on behalf of the colonies , and Georgia , New Jersey , and Massachusetts also appointed him as their agent to the Crown .
Franklin spent two months in Germany in 1766 , but his connections to the country stretched across a lifetime .
He declared a debt of gratitude to German scientist Otto von Guericke for his early studies of electricity .
Franklin also co-authored the first treaty of friendship between Germany and America in 1785 .
In September 1767 , Franklin visited Paris with his usual traveling partner , Sir John Pringle .
News of his electrical discoveries was widespread in France .
His reputation meant that he was introduced to many influential scientists and politicians , and also to King Louis XV.
While living in London in 1768 , he developed a phonetic alphabet in " A Scheme for a new Alphabet and a Reformed Mode of Spelling" .
This reformed alphabet discarded six letters Franklin regarded as redundant ( c , j , q , w , x , and y ) , and substituted six new letters for sounds he felt lacked letters of their own .
His new alphabet , however , never caught on , and he eventually lost interest .
In 1771 , Franklin made short journeys through different parts of England , staying with Joseph Priestley at Leeds , Thomas Percival at Manchester and Dr. Darwin at Litchfield .
Franklin belonged to a gentleman 's club ( which he called "honest Whigs " ) , which held stated meetings , and included members such as Richard Price and Andrew Kippis .
He was also a corresponding member of the Lunar Society of Birmingham , which included such other scientific and industrial luminaries as Matthew Boulton , James Watt , Josiah Wedgwood and Erasmus Darwin .
He had never been to Ireland before , and met and stayed with Lord Hillsborough , whom he believed was especially attentive .
Franklin noted of him that " all the plausible behaviour I have described is meant only , by patting and stroking the horse , to make him more patient , while the reins are drawn tighter , and the spurs set deeper into his sides . "
In Dublin , Franklin was invited to sit with the members of the Irish Parliament rather than in the gallery .
He was the first American to receive this honor .
While touring Ireland , he was moved by the level of poverty he saw .
Ireland 's economy was affected by the same trade regulations and laws of Britain that governed America .
Franklin feared that America could suffer the same effects should Britain 's " colonial exploitation " continue .
In Scotland , he spent five days with Lord Kames near Stirling and stayed for three weeks with David Hume in Edinburgh .
In 1773 , Franklin published two of his most celebrated pro-American satirical essays : , and " An Edict by the King of Prussia" .
He also published an " Abridgment of the Book of Common Prayer" , anonymously with Francis Dashwood .
Among the unusual features of this work is a funeral service reduced to six minutes in length , " to preserve the health and lives of the living . "
In June 1773 Franklin obtained private letters of Thomas Hutchinson and Andrew Oliver , governor and lieutenant governor of the Province of Massachusetts Bay , that proved they were encouraging the Crown to crack down on the rights of Bostonians .
Franklin sent them to America , where they escalated the tensions .
The British began to regard him as the fomenter of serious trouble .
Hopes for a peaceful solution ended as he was systematically ridiculed and humiliated by Solicitor-General Alexander Wedderburn , before the Privy Council on January 29 , 1774 .
He returned to Philadelphia in March 1775 , and abandoned his accommodationist stance .
In 1763 , soon after Franklin returned to Pennsylvania from England for the first time , the western frontier was engulfed in a bitter war known as Pontiac 's Rebellion .
The Paxton Boys , a group of settlers convinced that the Pennsylvania government was not doing enough to protect them from American Indian raids , murdered a group of peaceful Susquehannock Indians and marched on Philadelphia .
Franklin helped to organize a local militia to defend the capital against the mob .
He met with the Paxton leaders and persuaded them to disperse .
Franklin wrote a scathing attack against the racial prejudice of the Paxton Boys .
" If an " Indian " injures me , " he asked , "does it follow that I may revenge that Injury on all " Indians " ? "
He provided an early response to British surveillance through his own network of counter-surveillance and manipulation .
" He waged a public relations campaign , secured secret aid , played a role in privateering expeditions , and churned out effective and inflammatory propaganda . "
By the time Franklin arrived in Philadelphia on May 5 , 1775 , after his second mission to Great Britain , the American Revolution had begun – with fighting between colonials and British at Lexington and Concord .
The New England militia had trapped the main British army in Boston .
The Pennsylvania Assembly unanimously chose Franklin as their delegate to the Second Continental Congress .
In June 1776 , he was appointed a member of the Committee of Five that drafted the Declaration of Independence .
Although he was temporarily disabled by gout and unable to attend most meetings of the Committee , Franklin made several " small but important " changes to the draft sent to him by Thomas Jefferson .
At the signing , he is quoted as having replied to a comment by Hancock that they must all hang together : " Yes , we must , indeed , all hang together , or most assuredly we shall all hang separately . "
On July 26 , 1775 , the Second Continental Congress established the United States Post Office and named Benjamin Franklin as the first United States Postmaster General .
Franklin had been a postmaster for decades and was a natural choice for the position .
Franklin had just returned from England and was appointed chairman of a Committee of Investigation to establish a postal system .
The report of the Committee , providing for the appointment of a postmaster general for the 13 American colonies , was considered by the Continental Congress on July 25 and 26 .
On July 26 , 1775 , Franklin was appointed Postmaster General , the first appointed under the Continental Congress .
It established a postal system that became the United States Post Office , a system that continues to operate today .
In December 1776 , Franklin was dispatched to France as commissioner for the United States .
He took with him as secretary his 16-year-old grandson , William Temple Franklin .
They lived in a home in the Parisian suburb of Passy , donated by Jacques-Donatien Le Ray de Chaumont , who supported the United States .
He conducted the affairs of his country toward the French nation with great success , which included securing a critical military alliance in 1778 and negotiating the Treaty of Paris ( 1783 ) .
Among his associates in France was Honoré Gabriel Riqueti , comte de Mirabeau—a French Revolutionary writer , orator and statesman who in early 1791 would be elected president of the National Assembly .
In July 1784 , Franklin met with Mirabeau and contributed anonymous materials that the Frenchman used in his first signed work : " Considerations sur l'ordre de Cincinnatus" .
The publication was critical of the Society of the Cincinnati , established in the United States .
Franklin and Mirabeau thought of it as a "noble order " , inconsistent with the egalitarian ideals of the new republic .
During his stay in France , Benjamin Franklin was active as a freemason , serving as Grand Master of the Lodge Les Neuf Sœurs from 1779 until 1781 .
He was a Past Grand Master of Pennsylvania .
In 1784 , when Franz Mesmer began to publicize his theory of "animal magnetism " which was considered offensive by many , Louis XVI appointed a commission to investigate it .
These included the chemist Antoine Lavoisier , the physician Joseph-Ignace Guillotin , the astronomer Jean Sylvain Bailly , and Benjamin Franklin .
Franklin 's advocacy for religious tolerance in France contributed to arguments made by French philosophers and politicians that resulted in Louis XVI 's signing of the Edict of Versailles in November 1787 .
This edict effectively nullified the Edict of Fontainebleau , which had denied non-Catholics civil status and the right to openly practice their faith .
Franklin also served as American minister to Sweden , although he never visited that country .
He negotiated a treaty that was signed in April 1783 .
On August 27 , 1783 , in Paris , Franklin witnessed the world 's first hydrogen balloon flight .
" Le Globe" , created by professor Jacques Charles and Les Frères Robert , was watched by a vast crowd as it rose from the Champ de Mars ( now the site of the Eiffel Tower ) .
This so enthused Franklin that he subscribed financially to the next project to build a manned hydrogen balloon .
On December 1 , 1783 , Franklin was seated in the special enclosure for honoured guests when " La Charlière " took off from the Jardin des Tuileries , piloted by Jacques Charles and Nicolas-Louis Robert .
When he returned home in 1785 , Franklin occupied a position only second to that of George Washington as the champion of American independence .
Le Ray honored him with a commissioned portrait painted by Joseph Duplessis , which now hangs in the National Portrait Gallery of the Smithsonian Institution in Washington , D.C.
After his return , Franklin became an abolitionist and freed his two slaves .
He eventually became president of the Pennsylvania Abolition Society .
In 1787 , Franklin served as a delegate to the Philadelphia Convention .
He held an honorary position and seldom engaged in debate .
He is the only Founding Father who is a signatory of all four of the major documents of the founding of the United States : the Declaration of Independence , the Treaty of Alliance with France , the Treaty of Paris and the United States Constitution .
In 1787 , a group of prominent ministers in Lancaster , Pennsylvania , proposed the foundation of a new college named in Franklin 's honor .
Franklin donated £200 towards the development of Franklin College ( now called Franklin & Marshall College ) .
Between 1771 and 1788 , he finished his autobiography .
While it was at first addressed to his son , it was later completed for the benefit of mankind at the request of a friend .
Franklin strongly supported the right to freedom of speech :
" In those wretched countries where a man cannot call his tongue his own , he can scarce call anything his own .
Whoever would overthrow the liberty of a nation must begin by subduing the freeness of speech ...
" Without freedom of thought there can be no such thing as wisdom , and no such thing as public liberty without freedom of speech , which is the right of every man .. . " ( 1722 )
In his later years , as Congress was forced to deal with the issue of slavery , Franklin wrote several essays that stressed the importance of the abolition of slavery and of the integration of blacks into American society .
In 1790 , Quakers from New York and Pennsylvania presented their petition for abolition to Congress .
Their argument against slavery was backed by the Pennsylvania Abolitionist Society and its president , Benjamin Franklin .
Special balloting conducted October 18 , 1785 , unanimously elected Franklin the sixth president of the Supreme Executive Council of Pennsylvania , replacing John Dickinson .
The office of president of Pennsylvania was analogous to the modern position of governor .
It is not clear why Dickinson had to be replaced with less than two weeks remaining before the regular election .
Franklin held that office for slightly over three years , longer than any other , and served the constitutional limit of three full terms .
Shortly after his initial election he was reelected to a full term on October 29 , 1785 , and again in the fall of 1786 and on October 31 , 1787 .
Officially , his term concluded on November 5 , 1788 , but there is some question regarding the "de facto " end of his term , suggesting that the aging Franklin may not have been actively involved in the day-to-day operation of the council toward the end of his time in office .
Like the other advocates of republicanism , Franklin emphasized that the new republic could survive only if the people were virtuous .
All his life he explored the role of civic and personal virtue , as expressed in " Poor Richard 's " aphorisms .
Franklin felt that organized religion was necessary to keep men good to their fellow men , but rarely attended religious services himself .
When Franklin met Voltaire in Paris and asked this great apostle of the Enlightenment to bless his grandson , Voltaire said in English , " God and Liberty , " and added , " this is the only appropriate benediction for the grandson of Monsieur Franklin . "
The family attended the Old South Church , the most liberal Puritan congregation in Boston , where Benjamin Franklin was baptized in 1706 .
Franklin 's father , a poor chandler , owned a copy of a book , " Bonifacius : Essays to Do Good" , by the Puritan preacher and family friend Cotton Mather , which Franklin often cited as a key influence on his life .
Franklin 's first pen name , Silence Dogood , paid homage both to the book and to a widely known sermon by Mather .
The book preached the importance of forming voluntary associations to benefit society .
Franklin learned about forming do-good associations from Cotton Mather , but his organizational skills made him the most influential force in making voluntarism an enduring part of the American ethos .
Franklin formulated a presentation of his beliefs and published it in 1728 .
It did not mention many of the Puritan ideas as regards belief in salvation , the divinity of Jesus , and indeed most religious dogma .
He clarified himself as a deist in his 1771 autobiography , although he still considered himself a Christian .
He retained a strong faith in a God as the wellspring of morality and goodness in man , and as a Providential actor in history responsible for American independence .
It was Ben Franklin who , at a critical impasse during the Constitutional Convention in June 1787 , attempted to introduce the practice of daily common prayer with these words :
... In the beginning of the contest with G. Britain , when we were sensible of danger we had daily prayer in this room for the Divine Protection .
– Our prayers , Sir , were heard , and they were graciously answered .
All of us who were engaged in the struggle must have observed frequent instances of a Superintending providence in our favor .
And have we now forgotten that powerful friend ?
or do we imagine that we no longer need His assistance .
I have lived , Sir , a long time and the longer I live , the more convincing proofs I see of this truth – that God governs in the affairs of men .
And if a sparrow cannot fall to the ground without his notice , is it probable that an empire can rise without his aid ?
We have been assured , Sir , in the sacred writings that "except the Lord build they labor in vain that build it . "
I firmly believe this ; and I also believe that without his concurring aid we shall succeed in this political building no better than the Builders of Babel : ...
I therefore beg leave to move – that henceforth prayers imploring the assistance of Heaven , and its blessings on our deliberations , be held in this Assembly every morning before we proceed to business , and that one or more of the Clergy of this City be requested to officiate in that service .
However , the motion met with resistance and was never brought to a vote .
Franklin was an enthusiastic supporter of the evangelical minister George Whitefield during the First Great Awakening .
Franklin did not subscribe to Whitefield 's theology , but he admired Whitefield for exhorting people to worship God through good works .
Franklin published all of Whitefield 's sermons and journals , thereby boosting the Great Awakening .
When he stopped attending church , Franklin wrote in his autobiography :
... Sunday being my studying day , I never was without some religious principles .
I never doubted , for instance , the existence of the Deity ; that He made the world , and governed it by His providence ; that the most acceptable service of God was the doing good to man ; that our souls are immortal ; and that all crime will be punished , and virtue rewarded , either here or hereafter .
Franklin retained a lifelong commitment to the Puritan virtues and political values he had grown up with , and through his civic work and publishing , he succeeded in passing these values into the American culture permanently .
These Puritan values included his devotion to egalitarianism , education , industry , thrift , honesty , temperance , charity and community spirit .
The classical authors read in the Enlightenment period taught an abstract ideal of republican government based on hierarchical social orders of king , aristocracy and commoners .
It was widely believed that English liberties relied on their balance of power , but also hierarchal deference to the privileged class .
" Puritanism ... and the epidemic evangelism of the mid-eighteenth century , had created challenges to the traditional notions of social stratification " by preaching that the Bible taught all men are equal , that the true value of a man lies in his moral behavior , not his class , and that all men can be saved .
Franklin , steeped in Puritanism and an enthusiastic supporter of the evangelical movement , rejected the salvation dogma , but embraced the radical notion of egalitarian democracy .
Franklin 's commitment to teach these values was itself something he gained from his Puritan upbringing , with its stress on "inculcating virtue and character in themselves and their communities . "
These Puritan values and the desire to pass them on , were one of Franklin 's quintessentially American characteristics , and helped shape the character of the nation .
Franklin 's writings on virtue were derided by some European authors , such as Jackob Fugger in his critical work " Portrait of American Culture " .
Max Weber considered Franklin 's ethical writings a culmination of the Protestant ethic , which ethic created the social conditions necessary for the birth of capitalism .
One of Franklin 's notable characteristics was his respect , tolerance and promotion of all churches .
Referring to his experience in Philadelphia , he wrote in his autobiography , "new Places of worship were continually wanted , and generally erected by voluntary Contribution , my Mite for such purpose , whatever might be the Sect , was never refused . "
" He helped create a new type of nation that would draw strength from its religious pluralism . "
The first generation of Puritans had been intolerant of dissent , but by the early 18th century , when Franklin grew up in the Puritan church , tolerance of different churches was the norm , and Massachusetts was known , in John Adams ' words , as " the most mild and equitable establishment of religion that was known in the world . "
The evangelical revivalists who were active mid-century , such as Franklin 's friend and preacher , George Whitefield , were the greatest advocates of religious freedom , " claiming liberty of conscience to be an 'inalienable right of every rational creature . '"
Whitefield 's supporters in Philadelphia , including Franklin , erected " a large , new hall , that ... could provide a pulpit to anyone of any belief . "
Franklin 's rejection of dogma and doctrine and his stress on the God of ethics and morality and civic virtue made him the "prophet of tolerance . "
While he was living in London in 1774 , he was present at the birth of British Unitarianism , attending the inaugural session of the Essex Street Chapel , at which Theophilus Lindsey drew together the first avowedly Unitarian congregation in England ; this was somewhat politically risky , and pushed religious tolerance to new boundaries , as a denial of the doctrine of the Trinity was illegal until the 1813 Act .
Although Franklin 's parents had intended for him to have a career in the Church , Franklin as a young man adopted the Enlightenment religious belief in deism , that God 's truths can be found entirely through nature and reason .
As a young man he rejected Christian dogma in a 1725 pamphlet " A Dissertation on Liberty and Necessity , Pleasure and Pain" , which he later saw as an embarrassment , while simultaneously asserting that God is " all wise , all good , all powerful . "
He defended his rejection of religious dogma with these words : " I think opinions should be judged by their influences and effects ; and if a man holds none that tend to make him less virtuous or more vicious , it may be concluded that he holds none that are dangerous , which I hope is the case with me . "
After the disillusioning experience of seeing the decay in his own moral standards , and those of two friends in London whom he had converted to Deism , Franklin turned back to a belief in the importance of organized religion , on the pragmatic grounds that without God and organized churches , man will not be good .
Moreover , because of his proposal that prayers be said in the Constitutional Convention of 1787 , many have contended that in his later life Franklin became a pious Christian .
At one point , he wrote to Thomas Paine , criticizing his manuscript , " The Age of Reason " :
According to David Morgan , Franklin was a proponent of religion in general .
He prayed to " Powerful Goodness " and referred to God as " the infinite" .
John Adams noted that Franklin was a mirror in which people saw their own religion : " The Catholics thought him almost a Catholic .
The Church of England claimed him as one of them .
The Presbyterians thought him half a Presbyterian , and the Friends believed him a wet Quaker . "
Whatever else Franklin was , concludes Morgan , "he was a true champion of generic religion . "
In a letter to Richard Price , Franklin stated that he believed that religion should support itself without help from the government , claiming , " When a Religion is good , I conceive that it will support itself ; and , when it cannot support itself , and God does not take care to support , so that its Professors are oblig 'd to call for the help of the Civil Power , it is a sign , I apprehend , of its being a bad one . "
In 1790 , just about a month before he died , Franklin wrote a letter to Ezra Stiles , president of Yale University , who had asked him his views on religion :
On July 4 , 1776 , Congress appointed a three-member committee composed of Franklin , Thomas Jefferson , and John Adams to design the Great Seal of the United States .
Franklin 's proposal ( which was not adopted ) featured the motto : " Rebellion to Tyrants is Obedience to God " and a scene from the Book of Exodus , with Moses , the Israelites , the pillar of fire , and George III depicted as pharaoh .
The design that was produced was never acted upon by Congress , and the Great Seal 's design was not finalized until a third committee was appointed in 1782 .
Franklin sought to cultivate his character by a plan of 13 virtues , which he developed at age 20 ( in 1726 ) and continued to practice in some form for the rest of his life .
Franklin did not try to work on them all at once .
Instead , he would work on one and only one each week "leaving all others to their ordinary chance . "
While Franklin did not live completely by his virtues , and by his own admission he fell short of them many times , he believed the attempt made him a better man contributing greatly to his success and happiness , which is why in his autobiography , he devoted more pages to this plan than to any other single point ; in his autobiography Franklin wrote , " I hope , therefore , that some of my descendants may follow the example and reap the benefit . "
During Franklin 's lifetime slaves were numerous in Philadelphia .
In 1750 , half the persons in Philadelphia who had established probate estates owned slaves .
Dock workers in the city consisted of 15 % slaves .
Franklin owned as many as seven slaves , two males of whom worked in his household and his shop .
Franklin posted paid ads for the sale of slaves and for the capture of runaway slaves and allowed the sale of slaves in his general store .
Franklin profited from both the international and domestic slave trade , even criticizing slaves who had run off to join the British Army during the colonial wars of the 1740s and 1750s .
Franklin , however , later became a " cautious abolitionist " and became an outspoken critic of landed gentry slavery .
In 1758 , Franklin advocated the opening of a school for the education of black slaves in Philadelphia .
After returning from England in 1762 , Franklin became more anti-slavery , in his view believing that the institution promoted black degradation rather than the idea blacks were inherently inferior .
By 1770 , Franklin had freed his slaves and attacked the system of slavery and the international slave trade .
Franklin , however , refused to publicly debate the issue of slavery at the 1787 Constitutional Convention .
Similar to Thomas Jefferson , Franklin tended to take both sides of the issue of slavery , never fully divesting himself from the institution .
Franklin struggled with obesity throughout his middle-aged and later years , which resulted in multiple health problems , particularly gout , which worsened as he aged .
In poor health during the signing of the US Constitution in 1787 , he was rarely seen in public from then until his death .
Benjamin Franklin died from pleuritic attack at his home in Philadelphia on April 17 , 1790 , at age 84.
He was interred in Christ Church Burial Ground in Philadelphia .
In 1728 , aged 22 , Franklin wrote what he hoped would be his own epitaph :
The Body of B. Franklin Printer ; Like the Cover of an old Book , Its Contents torn out , And stript of its Lettering and Gilding , Lies here , Food for Worms .
But the Work shall not be wholly lost : For it will , as he believ 'd , appear once more , In a new & more perfect Edition , Corrected and Amended By the Author .
Franklin 's actual grave , however , as he specified in his final will , simply reads " Benjamin and Deborah Franklin " .
In 1773 , when Franklin 's work had moved from printing to science and politics , he corresponded with a French scientist , Jacques Barbeu-Dubourg , on the subject of preserving the dead for later revival by more advanced scientific methods , writing :
I should prefer to an ordinary death , being immersed with a few friends in a cask of Madeira , until that time , then to be recalled to life by the solar warmth of my dear country !
But in all probability , we live in a century too little advanced , and too near the infancy of science , to see such an art brought in our time to its perfection .
His death is described in the book " The Life of Benjamin Franklin " , quoting from the account of Dr. John Jones :
... when the pain and difficulty of breathing entirely left him , and his family were flattering themselves with the hopes of his recovery , when an imposthume , which had formed itself in his lungs , suddenly burst , and discharged a quantity of matter , which he continued to throw up while he had power ; but , as that failed , the organs of respiration became gradually oppressed ; a calm , lethargic state succeeded ; and on the 17th instant ( April 1790 ) , about eleven o'clock at night , he quietly expired , closing a long and useful life of eighty-four years and three months .
A signer of both the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution , Franklin is considered one of the Founding Fathers of the United States .
His pervasive influence in the early history of the nation has led to his being jocularly called " the only President of the United States who was never President of the United States . "
Since 1928 , it has adorned American $ 100 bills , which are sometimes referred to in slang as " Benjamins " or " Franklins . "
From 1948 to 1963 , Franklin 's portrait was on the half dollar .
He has appeared on a $ 50 bill and on several varieties of the $ 100 bill from 1914 and 1918 .
Franklin appears on the $ 1,000 Series EE Savings bond .
The city of Philadelphia contains around 5,000 likenesses of Benjamin Franklin , about half of which are located on the University of Pennsylvania campus .
Philadelphia 's Benjamin Franklin Parkway ( a major thoroughfare ) and Benjamin Franklin Bridge ( the first major bridge to connect Philadelphia with New Jersey ) are named in his honor .
In 1976 , as part of a bicentennial celebration , Congress dedicated a marble statue in Philadelphia 's Franklin Institute as the Benjamin Franklin National Memorial .
Many of Franklin 's personal possessions are also on display at the Institute , one of the few national memorials located on private property .
In London , his house at 36 Craven Street was first marked with a blue plaque and has since been opened to the public as the Benjamin Franklin House .
In 1998 , workmen restoring the building dug up the remains of six children and four adults hidden below the home .
Initial estimates are that the bones are about 200 years old and were buried at the time Franklin was living in the house , which was his home from 1757 to 1762 and from 1764 to 1775 .
Most of the bones show signs of having been dissected , sawn or cut .
One skull has been drilled with several holes .
Paul Knapman , the Westminster Coroner , said yesterday : " I cannot totally discount the possibility of a crime .
There is still a possibility that I may have to hold an inquest . "
The Friends of Benjamin Franklin House ( the organization responsible for the restoration ) note that the bones were likely placed there by William Hewson , who lived in the house for two years and who had built a small anatomy school at the back of the house .
They note that while Franklin likely knew what Hewson was doing , he probably did not participate in any dissections because he was much more of a physicist than a medical man .
Franklin bequeathed £1,000 ( about $ 4,400 at the time , or about $ 112,000 in 2011 dollars ) each to the cities of Boston and Philadelphia , in trust to gather interest for 200 years .
The trust began in 1785 when the French mathematician Charles-Joseph Mathon de la Cour , who admired Franklin greatly , wrote a friendly parody of Franklin 's " Poor Richard 's Almanack " called " Fortunate Richard " .
The main character leaves a smallish amount of money in his will , five lots of 100 "livres " , to collect interest over one , two , three , four or five full centuries , with the resulting astronomical sums to be spent on impossibly elaborate utopian projects .
Franklin , who was 79 years old at the time , wrote thanking him for a great idea and telling him that he had decided to leave a bequest of 1,000 pounds each to his native Boston and his adopted Philadelphia .
By 1990 , more than $ 2,000,000 had accumulated in Franklin 's Philadelphia trust , which had loaned the money to local residents .
From 1940 to 1990 , the money was used mostly for mortgage loans .
When the trust came due , Philadelphia decided to spend it on scholarships for local high school students .
Franklin 's Boston trust fund accumulated almost $ 5,000,000 during that same time ; at the end of its first 100 years a portion was allocated to help establish a trade school that became the Franklin Institute of Boston , and the whole fund was later dedicated to supporting this institute .
Benjamin Franklin is a prominent figure in American history comparable to Washington , Jefferson and Lincoln , and as such he has been honored on U.S. postage stamps many times .
The image of Franklin , the first Postmaster General of the United States , occurs on the face of U.S. postage more than any other notable American save that of George Washington .
Franklin appeared on the first U.S. postage stamp ( displayed above ) issued in 1847 .
From 1908 through 1923 the U.S. Post Office issued a series of postage stamps commonly referred to as the Washington-Franklin Issues where , along with George Washington , Franklin was depicted many times over a 14-year period , the longest run of any one series in U.S. postal history .
Along with the regular issue stamps Franklin however only appears on a few commemorative stamps .
Some of the finest portrayals of Franklin on record can be found on the engravings inscribed on the face of U.S. postage .
" Advice to a Friend on Choosing a Mistress " is a letter written by Benjamin Franklin , dated June 25 , 1745 , in which Franklin gives advice to a young man about channeling sexual urges .
Due to its licentious nature , the letter was not published in collections of Franklin 's papers in the United States during the nineteenth century .
Federal court decisions from the mid - to late- twentieth century cited the document as a reason for overturning obscenity laws , using it to make a case against censorship .
" The Princess and the Patriot : Ekaterina Dashkova , Benjamin Franklin and the Age of Enlightenment " exhibition opened in Philadelphia in February 2006 and ran through December 2006 .
Benjamin Franklin and Dashkova met only once , in Paris in 1781 .
Franklin was 75 and Dashkova was 37 . Franklin invited Dashkova to become the first woman to join the American Philosophical Society ; she was the only woman so honored for another 80 years .
Later , Dashkova reciprocated by making him the first American member of the Russian Academy of Sciences .
As a founding father of the United States , Franklin 's name has been attached to many things .
Franklin 's father , Josiah Franklin , was a tallow chandler , a soap-maker and a candle-maker .
Josiah was born at Ecton , Northamptonshire , England , on December 23 , 1657 , the son of Thomas Franklin , a blacksmith-farmer , and Jane White .
Benjamin 's mother , Abiah Folger , was born in Nantucket , Massachusetts , on August 15 , 1667 , to Peter Folger , a miller and schoolteacher , and his wife Mary Morrill , a former indentured servant .
Josiah Franklin had 17 children with his two wives .
He married his first wife , Anne Child , in about 1677 in Ecton and emigrated with her to Boston in 1683 ; they had three children before emigrating and four after .
After her death , Josiah married Abiah Folger on July 9 , 1689 , in the Old South Meeting House by Samuel Willard .
Benjamin , their eighth child , was Josiah Franklin 's 15th child and tenth and last son .
Benjamin Franklin 's mother , Abiah Folger , was born into a Puritan family among those that fled to Massachusetts to establish a purified Congregationalist Christianity in New England , when King Charles I of England began persecuting Puritans .
Her father was " the sort of rebel destined to transform colonial America " ; as clerk of the court , he was jailed for disobeying the local magistrate in defense of middle-class shopkeepers and artisans in conflict with wealthy landowners .
Ben Franklin followed in his grandfather 's footsteps in his battles against the wealthy Penn family that owned the Pennsylvania Colony .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Blood is a bodily fluid in animals that delivers necessary substances such as nutrients and oxygen to the cells and transports metabolic waste products away from those same cells .
In vertebrates , it is composed of blood cells suspended in blood plasma .
Plasma , which constitutes 55 % of blood fluid , is mostly water (92 % by volume ) , and contains dissipated proteins , glucose , mineral ions , hormones , carbon dioxide ( plasma being the main medium for excretory product transportation ) , and blood cells themselves .
Albumin is the main protein in plasma , and it functions to regulate the colloidal osmotic pressure of blood .
The blood cells are mainly red blood cells ( also called RBCs or erythrocytes ) and white blood cells , including leukocytes and platelets .
The most abundant cells in vertebrate blood are red blood cells .
These contain hemoglobin , an iron-containing protein , which facilitates transportation of oxygen by reversibly binding to this respiratory gas and greatly increasing its solubility in blood .
In contrast , carbon dioxide is almost entirely transported extracellularly dissolved in plasma as bicarbonate ion .
Vertebrate blood is bright red when its hemoglobin is oxygenated .
Some animals , such as crustaceans and mollusks , use hemocyanin to carry oxygen , instead of hemoglobin .
Insects and some mollusks use a fluid called hemolymph instead of blood , the difference being that hemolymph is not contained in a closed circulatory system .
In most insects , this "blood " does not contain oxygen-carrying molecules such as hemoglobin because their bodies are small enough for their tracheal system to suffice for supplying oxygen .
Jawed vertebrates have an adaptive immune system , based largely on white blood cells .
White blood cells help to resist infections and parasites .
Platelets are important in the clotting of blood .
Arthropods , using hemolymph , have hemocytes as part of their immune system .
Blood is circulated around the body through blood vessels by the pumping action of the heart .
In animals with lungs , arterial blood carries oxygen from inhaled air to the tissues of the body , and venous blood carries carbon dioxide , a waste product of metabolism produced by cells , from the tissues to the lungs to be exhaled .
Medical terms related to blood often begin with hemo- or hemato - ( also spelled haemo- and haemato-) from the Greek word ( "haima" ) for "blood " .
In terms of anatomy and histology , blood is considered a specialized form of connective tissue , given its origin in the bones and the presence of potential molecular fibers in the form of fibrinogen .
Blood performs many important functions within the body including :
Blood accounts for 7 % of the human body weight , with an average density of approximately 1060 kg/m3 , very close to pure water 's density of 1000 kg/m3 .
The average adult has a blood volume of roughly 5 liters ( 1.3 gal ) , which is composed of plasma and several kinds of cells .
These blood cells ( which are also called " corpuscles " or "formed elements " ) consist of erythrocytes ( red blood cells , RBCs ) , leukocytes ( white blood cells ) , and thrombocytes ( platelets ) .
By volume , the red blood cells constitute about 45 % of whole blood , the plasma about 54.3 % , and white cells about 0.7 % .
Whole blood ( plasma and cells ) exhibits non-Newtonian fluid dynamics ; its flow properties are adapted to flow effectively through tiny capillary blood vessels with less resistance than plasma by itself .
In addition , if all human hemoglobin were free in the plasma rather than being contained in RBCs , the circulatory fluid would be too viscous for the cardiovascular system to function effectively .
About 55 % of blood is blood plasma , a fluid that is the blood 's liquid medium , which by itself is straw-yellow in color .
The blood plasma volume totals of 2.7–3.0 liters ( 2.8–3.2 quarts ) in an average human .
It is essentially an aqueous solution containing 92 % water , 8 % blood plasma proteins , and trace amounts of other materials .
Plasma circulates dissolved nutrients , such as glucose , amino acids , and fatty acids ( dissolved in the blood or bound to plasma proteins ) , and removes waste products , such as carbon dioxide , urea , and lactic acid .
The term serum refers to plasma from which the clotting proteins have been removed .
Most of the proteins remaining are albumin and immunoglobulins .
Blood pH is regulated to stay within the narrow range of 7.35 to 7.45 , making it slightly basic .
Blood that has a pH below 7.35 is too acidic , whereas blood pH above 7.45 is too basic .
Blood pH , partial pressure of oxygen ( pO2 ) , partial pressure of carbon dioxide (pCO2 ) , and HCO3− are carefully regulated by a number of homeostatic mechanisms , which exert their influence principally through the respiratory system and the urinary system in order to control the acid-base balance and respiration .
An arterial blood gas test will measure these .
Plasma also circulates hormones transmitting their messages to various tissues .
The list of normal reference ranges for various blood electrolytes is extensive .
Human blood is typical of that of mammals , although the precise details concerning cell numbers , size , protein structure , and so on , vary somewhat between species .
In non-mammalian vertebrates , however , there are some key differences :
Blood is circulated around the body through blood vessels by the pumping action of the heart .
In humans , blood is pumped from the strong left ventricle of the heart through arteries to peripheral tissues and returns to the right atrium of the heart through veins .
It then enters the right ventricle and is pumped through the pulmonary artery to the lungs and returns to the left atrium through the pulmonary veins .
Blood then enters the left ventricle to be circulated again .
Arterial blood carries oxygen from inhaled air to all of the cells of the body , and venous blood carries carbon dioxide , a waste product of metabolism by cells , to the lungs to be exhaled .
However , one exception includes pulmonary arteries , which contain the most deoxygenated blood in the body , while the pulmonary veins contain oxygenated blood .
Additional return flow may be generated by the movement of skeletal muscles , which can compress veins and push blood through the valves in veins toward the right atrium .
The blood circulation was famously described by William Harvey in 1628 .
In vertebrates , the various cells of blood are made in the bone marrow in a process called hematopoiesis , which includes erythropoiesis , the production of red blood cells ; and myelopoiesis , the production of white blood cells and platelets .
During childhood , almost every human bone produces red blood cells ; as adults , red blood cell production is limited to the larger bones : the bodies of the vertebrae , the breastbone ( sternum ) , the ribcage , the pelvic bones , and the bones of the upper arms and legs .
In addition , during childhood , the thymus gland , found in the mediastinum , is an important source of T lymphocytes .
The proteinaceous component of blood ( including clotting proteins ) is produced predominantly by the liver , while hormones are produced by the endocrine glands and the watery fraction is regulated by the hypothalamus and maintained by the kidney .
Healthy erythrocytes have a plasma life of about 120 days before they are degraded by the spleen , and the Kupffer cells in the liver .
The liver also clears some proteins , lipids , and amino acids .
The kidney actively secretes waste products into the urine .
About 98.5 % of the oxygen in a sample of arterial blood in a healthy human breathing air at sea-level pressure is chemically combined with the Hgb .
About 1.5 % is physically dissolved in the other blood liquids and not connected to Hgb .
The hemoglobin molecule is the primary transporter of oxygen in mammals and many other species ( for exceptions , see below ) .
Hemoglobin has an oxygen binding capacity of between 1.36 and 1.37 mL O2 per gram Hemoglobin , which increases the total blood oxygen capacity seventyfold , compared to if oxygen solely was carried by its solubility of 0.03 mL O2 per liter blood per mmHg partial pressure of oxygen ( approximately 100 mmHg in arteries ) .
With the exception of pulmonary and umbilical arteries and their corresponding veins , arteries carry oxygenated blood away from the heart and deliver it to the body via arterioles and capillaries , where the oxygen is consumed ; afterwards , venules , and veins carry deoxygenated blood back to the heart .
Under normal conditions in adult humans at rest ; hemoglobin in blood leaving the lungs is about 98–99 % saturated with oxygen , achieving an "oxygen delivery " of between 950 - 1150 mL/min to the body .
In a healthy adult at rest , "oxygen consumption " is approximately 200 - 250 mL/min , and "deoxygenated " blood returning to the lungs is still approximately 75 % ( 70 to 78 % ) saturated .
Increased oxygen consumption during sustained exercise reduces the oxygen saturation of venous blood , which can reach less than 15 % in a trained athlete ; although breathing rate and blood flow increase to compensate , oxygen saturation in arterial blood can drop to 95 % or less under these conditions .
Oxygen saturation this low is considered dangerous in an individual at rest ( for instance , during surgery under anesthesia ) .
Sustained hypoxia ( oxygenation of less than 90 % ) , is dangerous to health , and severe hypoxia ( saturations of less than 30 % ) may be rapidly fatal .
A fetus , receiving oxygen via the placenta , is exposed to much lower oxygen pressures ( about 21 % of the level found in an adult 's lungs ) , and , so , fetuses produce another form of hemoglobin with a much higher affinity for oxygen ( hemoglobin F) in order to function under these conditions .
CO2 is carried in blood in three different ways .
( The exact percentages vary depending whether it is arterial or venous blood ) .
Most of it ( about 70 % ) is converted to bicarbonate ions by the enzyme carbonic anhydrase in the red blood cells by the reaction CO2 + H2O → H2CO3 → H+ + ; about 7 % is dissolved in the plasma ; and about 23 % is bound to hemoglobin as carbamino compounds .
Hemoglobin , the main oxygen-carrying molecule in red blood cells , carries both oxygen and carbon dioxide .
However , the CO2 bound to hemoglobin does not bind to the same site as oxygen .
Instead , it combines with the N-terminal groups on the four globin chains .
However , because of allosteric effects on the hemoglobin molecule , the binding of CO2 decreases the amount of oxygen that is bound for a given partial pressure of oxygen .
The decreased binding to carbon dioxide in the blood due to increased oxygen levels is known as the Haldane effect , and is important in the transport of carbon dioxide from the tissues to the lungs .
A rise in the partial pressure of CO2 or a lower pH will cause offloading of oxygen from hemoglobin , which is known as the Bohr effect .
Deoxyhemoglobin binds most of the hydrogen ions as it has a much greater affinity for more hydrogen than does oxyhemoglobin .
In mammals , blood is in equilibrium with lymph , which is continuously formed in tissues from blood by capillary ultrafiltration .
Lymph is collected by a system of small lymphatic vessels and directed to the thoracic duct , which drains into the left subclavian vein where lymph rejoins the systemic blood circulation .
Blood circulation transports heat throughout the body , and adjustments to this flow are an important part of thermoregulation .
Increasing blood flow to the surface ( e .g. , during warm weather or strenuous exercise ) causes warmer skin , resulting in faster heat loss .
In contrast , when the external temperature is low , blood flow to the extremities and surface of the skin is reduced and to prevent heat loss and is circulated to the important organs of the body , preferentially .
The restriction of blood flow can also be used in specialized tissues to cause engorgement , resulting in an erection of that tissue ; examples are the erectile tissue in the penis and clitoris .
Another example of a hydraulic function is the jumping spider , in which blood forced into the legs under pressure causes them to straighten for a powerful jump , without the need for bulky muscular legs .
In insects , the blood ( more properly called hemolymph ) is not involved in the transport of oxygen .
( Openings called tracheae allow oxygen from the air to diffuse directly to the tissues ) .
Insect blood moves nutrients to the tissues and removes waste products in an open system .
Other invertebrates use respiratory proteins to increase the oxygen-carrying capacity .
Hemoglobin is the most common respiratory protein found in nature .
Hemocyanin ( blue ) contains copper and is found in crustaceans and mollusks .
It is thought that tunicates ( sea squirts ) might use vanabins ( proteins containing vanadium ) for respiratory pigment ( bright-green , blue , or orange ) .
In many invertebrates , these oxygen-carrying proteins are freely soluble in the blood ; in vertebrates they are contained in specialized red blood cells , allowing for a higher concentration of respiratory pigments without increasing viscosity or damaging blood filtering organs like the kidneys .
Giant tube worms have unusual hemoglobins that allow them to live in extraordinary environments .
These hemoglobins also carry sulfides normally fatal in other animals .
The coloring matter of blood ( hemochrome ) is largely due to the protein in the blood responsible for oxygen transport .
Hemoglobin is the principal determinant of the color of blood in vertebrates .
Each molecule has four heme groups , and their interaction with various molecules alters the exact color .
In vertebrates and other hemoglobin-using creatures , arterial blood and capillary blood are bright red , as oxygen imparts a strong red color to the heme group .
Deoxygenated blood is a darker shade of red ; this is present in veins , and can be seen during blood donation and when venous blood samples are taken .
This is because the spectrum of light absorbed by hemoglobin differs between the oxygenated and deoxygenated states .
Blood in carbon monoxide poisoning is bright red , because carbon monoxide causes the formation of carboxyhemoglobin .
In cyanide poisoning , the body cannot utilize oxygen , so the venous blood remains oxygenated , increasing the redness .
There are some conditions affecting the heme groups present in hemoglobin that can make the skin appear blue—a symptom called cyanosis .
If the heme is oxidized , methaemoglobin , which is more brownish and cannot transport oxygen , is formed .
In the rare condition sulfhemoglobinemia , arterial hemoglobin is partially oxygenated , and appears dark red with a bluish hue .
Veins close to the surface of the skin appear blue for a variety of reasons .
However , the factors that contribute to this alteration of color perception are related to the light-scattering properties of the skin and the processing of visual input by the visual cortex , rather than the actual color of the venous blood .
Skinks in the genus " Prasinohaema " have green blood due to a buildup of the waste product biliverdin .
The blood of most mollusks – including cephalopods and gastropods – as well as some arthropods , such as horseshoe crabs , is blue , as it contains the copper-containing protein hemocyanin at concentrations of about 50 grams per liter .
Hemocyanin is colorless when deoxygenated and dark blue when oxygenated .
The blood in the circulation of these creatures , which generally live in cold environments with low oxygen tensions , is grey-white to pale yellow , and it turns dark blue when exposed to the oxygen in the air , as seen when they bleed .
This is due to change in color of hemocyanin when it is oxidized .
Hemocyanin carries oxygen in extracellular fluid , which is in contrast to the intracellular oxygen transport in mammals by hemoglobin in RBCs .
The blood of most annelid worms and some marine polychaetes use chlorocruorin to transport oxygen .
It is green in color in dilute solutions .
Hemerythrin is used for oxygen transport in the marine invertebrates sipunculids , priapulids , brachiopods , and the annelid worm , magelona .
The blood of some species of ascidians and tunicates , also known as sea squirts , contains proteins called vanabins .
These proteins are based on vanadium , and give the creatures a concentration of vanadium in their bodies 100 times higher than the surrounding sea water .
It is not clear whether these vanabins actually carry oxygen .
When exposed to oxygen , however , vanabins turn a mustard yellow .
Substances other than oxygen can bind to hemoglobin ; in some cases this can cause irreversible damage to the body .
Carbon monoxide , for example , is extremely dangerous when carried to the blood via the lungs by inhalation , because carbon monoxide irreversibly binds to hemoglobin to form carboxyhemoglobin , so that less hemoglobin is free to bind oxygen , and fewer oxygen molecules can be transported throughout the blood .
A fire burning in an enclosed room with poor ventilation presents a very dangerous hazard , since it can create a build-up of carbon monoxide in the air .
Some carbon monoxide binds to hemoglobin when smoking tobacco .
Blood for transfusion is obtained from human donors by blood donation and stored in a blood bank .
There are many different blood types in humans , the ABO blood group system , and the Rhesus blood group system being the most important .
Transfusion of blood of an incompatible blood group may cause severe , often fatal , complications , so crossmatching is done to ensure that a compatible blood product is transfused .
Other blood products administered intravenously are platelets , blood plasma , cryoprecipitate , and specific coagulation factor concentrates .
Many forms of medication ( from antibiotics to chemotherapy ) are administered intravenously , as they are not readily or adequately absorbed by the digestive tract .
After severe acute blood loss , liquid preparations , generically known as plasma expanders , can be given intravenously , either solutions of salts ( NaCl , KCl , CaCl2 etc. ) at physiological concentrations , or colloidal solutions , such as dextrans , human serum albumin , or fresh frozen plasma .
In these emergency situations , a plasma expander is a more effective life-saving procedure than a blood transfusion , because the metabolism of transfused red blood cells does not restart immediately after a transfusion .
In modern evidence-based medicine , bloodletting is used in management of a few rare diseases , including hemochromatosis and polycythemia .
However , bloodletting and leeching were common unvalidated interventions used until the 19th century , as many diseases were incorrectly thought to be due to an excess of blood , according to Hippocratic medicine .
According to the " Oxford English Dictionary" , the word "blood " dates to the oldest English , circa 1000 AD.
The word is derived from Middle English , which is derived from the Old English word "blôd" , which is akin to the Old High German word "bluot" , meaning blood .
In classical Greek medicine , blood was associated with air , with Springtime , and with a merry and gluttonous ( " sanguine " ) personality .
It was also believed to be produced exclusively by the liver .
In Hippocratic medicine , blood was considered to be one of the four humors , the others being phlegm , yellow bile , and black bile .
The ABO blood group system was discovered in the year 1900 by Karl Landsteiner .
In 1907 the first successful blood transfusion was performed .
The first non-direct transfusion was performed on March 27 , 1914 .
Due to its importance to life , blood is associated with a large number of beliefs .
One of the most basic is the use of blood as a symbol for family relationships through birth/parentage ; to be "related by blood " is to be related by ancestry or descendance , rather than marriage .
This bears closely to bloodlines , and sayings such as "blood is thicker than water " and "bad blood" , as well as " Blood brother " .
Blood is given particular emphasis in the Jewish and Christian religions , because Leviticus 17 :11 says " the life of a creature is in the blood . "
This phrase is part of the Levitical law forbidding the drinking of blood or eating meat with the blood still intact instead of being poured off .
Mythic references to blood can sometimes be connected to the life-giving nature of blood , seen in such events as childbirth , as contrasted with the blood of injury or death .
In many indigenous Australian Aboriginal peoples ' traditions , ochre ( particularly red ) and blood , both high in iron content and considered Maban , are applied to the bodies of dancers for ritual .
In many Aboriginal rituals and ceremonies , red ochre is rubbed all over the naked bodies of the dancers .
In secret , sacred male ceremonies , blood extracted from the veins of the participant 's arms is exchanged and rubbed on their bodies .
Red ochre is used in similar ways in less-secret ceremonies .
Blood is also used to fasten the feathers of birds onto people 's bodies .
Bird feathers contain a protein that is highly magnetically sensitive .
Lawlor comments that blood employed in this fashion is held by these peoples to attune the dancers to the invisible energetic realm of the Dreamtime .
Lawlor then connects these invisible energetic realms and magnetic fields , because iron is magnetic .
Among the Germanic tribes ( such as the Anglo-Saxons and the Norsemen ) , blood was used during their sacrifices ; the " Blóts " .
The blood was considered to have the power of its originator , and , after the butchering , the blood was sprinkled on the walls , on the statues of the gods , and on the participants themselves .
This act of sprinkling blood was called "blóedsian " in Old English , and the terminology was borrowed by the Roman Catholic Church becoming " to bless " and "blessing" .
The Hittite word for blood , "ishar " was a cognate to words for "oath " and "bond" , see Ishara .
The Ancient Greeks believed that the blood of the gods , "ichor" , was a substance that was poisonous to mortals .
As a relic of Germanic Law the cruentation , an ordeal where the corpse of the victim was supposed to start bleeding in the presence of the murderer was used until the early 17th century .
In Genesis 9:4 , God prohibited Noah and his sons from eating blood ( see Noahide Law ) .
This command continued to be observed by the Eastern Orthodox .
It is also found in the Bible that when the Angel of Death came around to the Hebrew house that the first-born child would not die if the angel saw lamb 's blood wiped across the doorway .
At the Council of Jerusalem , the apostles prohibited certain Christians from consuming blood—this is documented in Acts 15 :20 and 29 .
This chapter specifies a reason (especially in verses 19-21 ) : It was to avoid offending Jews who had become Christians , because the Mosaic Law Code prohibited the practice .
Christ 's blood is the means for the atonement of sins .
Also , ″ … the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin . " ( 1 John 1:7 ) , “ … Unto him [God that loved us , and washed us from our sins in his own blood . "
( Revelation 1:5 ) , and " And they overcame him ( Satan ) by the blood
of the Lamb the Christ , and by the word of their testimony … ” ( Revelation 12:11 ) .
Some Christian churches , including Roman Catholicism , Eastern Orthodoxy , Oriental Orthodoxy , and the Assyrian Church of the East teach that , when consecrated , the Eucharistic wine actually becomes the blood of Jesus for worshippers to drink .
Thus in the consecrated wine , Jesus becomes spiritually and physically present .
This teaching is rooted in the Last Supper , as written in the four gospels of the Bible , in which Jesus stated to his disciples that the bread that they ate was his body , and the wine was his blood .
" " This cup is the new testament in my blood , which is shed for you . "
Most forms of Protestantism , especially those of a Wesleyan or Presbyterian lineage , teach that the wine is no more than a symbol of the blood of Christ , who is spiritually but not physically present .
Lutheran theology teaches that the body and blood is present together "in , with , and under " the bread and wine of the Eucharistic feast .
In Judaism , animal blood may not be consumed even in the smallest quantity ( Leviticus 3:17 and elsewhere ) ; this is reflected in Jewish dietary laws ( Kashrut ) .
Blood is purged from meat by rinsing and soaking in water ( to loosen clots ) , salting and then rinsing with water again several times .
Eggs must also be checked and any blood spots removed before consumption .
Although blood from fish is Biblically kosher , it is rabbinically forbidden to consume fish blood to avoid the appearance of breaking the Biblical prohibition .
Another ritual involving blood involves the covering of the blood of fowl and game after slaughtering ( Leviticus 17 :13 ) ; the reason given by the Torah is : " Because the life of the animal is its blood " ( ibid 17 :14 ) .
In relation to human beings , Kabbalah expounds on this verse that the animal soul of a person is in the blood , and that physical desires stem from it .
Likewise , the mystical reason for salting temple sacrifices and slaughtered meat is to remove the blood of animal-like passions from the person .
By removing the animal 's blood , the animal energies and life-force contained in the blood are removed , making the meat fit for human consumption .
Consumption of food containing blood is forbidden by Islamic dietary laws .
This is derived from the statement in the Qur 'an , sura Al-Ma'ida ( 5:3 ) : " Forbidden to you ( for food ) are : dead meat , blood , the flesh of swine , and that on which has been invoked the name of other than Allah . "
Blood is considered as unclean and in Islam cleanliness is part of the faith , hence there are specific methods to obtain physical and ritual status of cleanliness once bleeding has occurred .
Specific rules and prohibitions apply to menstruation , postnatal bleeding and irregular vaginal bleeding .
But Islam does not forbid blood transfusion as long as it is done to save lives .
Based on their interpretation of scriptures such as Acts 15 :28 , 29 ( " Keep abstaining ...from blood . " ) ,
Jehovah 's Witnesses neither consume blood nor accept transfusions of whole blood or its major components : red blood cells , white blood cells , platelets ( thrombocytes ) , and plasma .
Members may personally decide whether they will accept medical procedures that involve their own blood or substances that are further fractionated from the four major components .
In south East Asian popular culture , it is often said that if a man 's nose produces a small flow of blood , he is experiencing sexual desire .
This often appears in Chinese-language and Hong Kong films as well as in Japanese and Korean culture parodied in anime , manga , and drama .
Characters , mostly males , will often be shown with a nosebleed if they have just seen someone nude or in little clothing , or if they have had an erotic thought or fantasy ; this is based on the idea that a male 's blood pressure will spike dramatically when aroused .
Vampires are mythical creatures that drink blood directly for sustenance , usually with a preference for human blood .
Cultures all over the world have myths of this kind ; for example the ' Nosferatu' legend , a human who achieves damnation and immortality by drinking the blood of others , originates from Eastern European folklore .
Ticks , leeches , female mosquitoes , vampire bats , and an assortment of other natural creatures do consume the blood of other animals , but only bats are associated with vampires .
This has no relation to vampire bats , which are new world creatures discovered well after the origins of the European myths .
Blood residue can help forensic investigators identify weapons , reconstruct a criminal action , and link suspects to the crime .
Through bloodstain pattern analysis , forensic information can also be gained from the spatial distribution of bloodstains .
Blood residue analysis is also a technique used in archeology .
Blood is one of the body fluids that has been used in art .
In particular , the performances of Viennese Actionist Hermann Nitsch , Istvan Kantor , Franko B , Lennie Lee , Ron Athey , Yang Zhichao , Lucas Abela and Kira O' Reilly , along with the photography of Andres Serrano , have incorporated blood as a prominent visual element .
Marc Quinn has made sculptures using frozen blood , including a cast of his own head made using his own blood .
The term "blood " is used in genealogical circles to refer to one 's ancestry , origins , and ethnic background as in the word "bloodline " .
Other terms where blood is used in a family history sense are "blue-blood" , "royal blood" , "mixed-blood " and "blood relative" .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Bar Kokhba is a double album by John Zorn , recorded between 1994 and 1996 .
It features music from Zorn 's " Masada " project , rearranged for small ensembles .
The Allmusic review by Marc Gilman awarded the album 4½ stars noting that " While some compositions retain their original structure and sound , some are expanded and probed by Zorn 's arrangements , and resemble avant-garde classical music more than jazz .
But this is the beauty of the album ; the ensembles provide a forum for Zorn to expand his compositions .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
William Boyd " Bill " Watterson II ( born July 5 , 1958 ) is an American artist and the author of the comic strip " Calvin and Hobbes " , which was syndicated from 1985 to 1995 .
Watterson stopped drawing " Calvin and Hobbes " at the end of 1995 with a short statement to newspaper editors and his readers that he felt he had achieved all he could in the medium .
Watterson is known for his views on licensing and comic syndication and his move back into private life after drawing " Calvin and Hobbes " came to a close .
Bill Watterson was born in Washington , D.C. , United States , where his father , James G. Watterson ( born 1932 ) worked as a patent attorney .
The family relocated to Chagrin Falls , Ohio in 1965 when Watterson was six years old because his mother , Kathryn , wanted to be closer to her family and felt the small town was a good place to raise children .
Watterson , who drew his first cartoon at age eight , spent much time in childhood alone , drawing and cartooning .
This continued through his school years , during which time he discovered comic strips like " Pogo" , " Krazy Kat" , and Charles Schulz ' " Peanuts " which subsequently inspired and influenced his desire to become a professional cartoonist .
On one occasion , when he was in fourth grade , he wrote a letter to Charles Schulz , who—to Watterson 's surprise—responded , making a big impression on him at the time .
His parents encouraged him in his artistic pursuits .
Later they would recall him as a " conservative child " —imaginative , but " not in a fantasy way" , and certainly nothing like the character of Calvin he would later create .
Watterson found avenues for his cartooning talents throughout primary and secondary school , creating high school-themed super hero comics with his friends and contributing cartoons and art to the school newspaper and yearbook .
From 1976 to 1980 , Watterson attended Kenyon College and received a Bachelor of Arts degree in political science .
Although he had already decided upon a career in cartooning , he felt his studies would help him move into editorial cartooning .
While at college he continued to develop his art skills—during his sophomore year he painted Michelangelo 's " Creation of Adam " on the ceiling of his dorm room .
He also contributed cartoons to the college newspaper , some of which included the original " Spaceman Spiff " cartoons .
Later , when Watterson was creating names for the characters in his comic strip , he decided upon Calvin ( after the Protestant reformer John Calvin ) and Hobbes ( after the social philosopher Thomas Hobbes ) , allegedly as a "tip of the hat " to the political science department at Kenyon .
In " The Complete Calvin And Hobbes " , Watterson stated that Calvin is named for " a 16th-century theologian who believed in predestination , " and Hobbes for " a 17th-century philosopher with a dim view of human nature . "
Watterson was inspired by the work of Kenyon alum and " Cincinnati Enquirer " political cartoonist Jim Borgman , who currently draws " Zits " , and decided to try to follow the same career path as Borgman , who in turn offered support and encouragement to the aspiring artist .
Watterson graduated in 1980 and was hired on a trial basis at a competing paper of the " Enquirer" , the " Cincinnati Post " .
Watterson quickly discovered that the job was full of unexpected challenges which prevented him from performing his duties to the standards set for him .
Not the least of these challenges was his unfamiliarity with the Cincinnati political scene as he had never resided in or near the city , having grown up in the Cleveland area and attending college in central Ohio .
The " Post " abruptly fired Watterson before his contract was up .
He then joined a small advertising agency and worked there for four years as a designer , creating grocery advertisements while also working on his own projects including development of his own cartoon strip and contributions to " Target : The Political Cartoon Quarterly " .
Watterson has said he works for personal fulfillment .
As he told the graduating class of 1990 at Kenyon College , " It 's surprising how hard we 'll work when the work is done just for ourselves . "
" Calvin and Hobbes " was first published on November 18 , 1985 .
In " Calvin and Hobbes Tenth Anniversary Book" , he wrote that his influences included Charles Schulz for " Peanuts " ; Walt Kelly for " Pogo " and George Herriman for " Krazy Kat" .
Watterson wrote the introduction to the first volume of " The Komplete Kolor Krazy Kat" .
Watterson 's style also reflects the influence of Winsor McCay 's " Little Nemo in Slumberland " .
Like many artists , Watterson incorporated elements of his life , interests , beliefs and values into his work—for example , his hobby as a cyclist , memories of his own father 's speeches about " building character " , and his views on merchandising and corporations .
Watterson 's cat , Sprite , very much inspired the personality and physical features of Hobbes .
Watterson spent much of his career trying to change the climate of newspaper comics .
He believed that the artistic value of comics was being undermined , and that the space they occupied in newspapers continually decreased , subject to arbitrary whims of shortsighted publishers .
Furthermore , he opined that art should not be judged by the medium for which it is created ( i .e . , there is no "high " art or "low " art—just art ) .
For years , Watterson battled against pressure from publishers to merchandise his work , something he felt would cheapen his comic .
He refused to merchandise his creations on the grounds that displaying " Calvin and Hobbes " images on commercially sold mugs , stickers and T-shirts would devalue the characters and their personalities .
Watterson said that Universal kept putting pressure on him and added that his contract , which he said he signed without fully perusing it because as a new artist he was happy to find a syndicate willing to give him a chance ( two syndicates had denied Watterson ) , was so one-sided that if Universal really wanted to , they could license his characters against his will , and could even fire him but continue " Calvin and Hobbes " with a new artist .
Watterson 's position eventually won out and he was able to renegotiate his contract so that he would receive all rights to his work , but later added that the licensing fight exhausted him and contributed to the need for a nine-month sabbatical in 1991 .
Despite Watterson 's efforts , many unofficial knockoffs have been found , including items that depict Calvin and Hobbes consuming alcohol or Calvin urinating on a logo .
Watterson has said that only " thieves and vandals " have made money off of " Calvin and Hobbes " .
Watterson announced the end of " Calvin and Hobbes " on November 9 , 1995 , with the following letter to newspaper editors :
The last strip of " Calvin and Hobbes " was published on December 31 , 1995 .
Since the conclusion of " Calvin and Hobbes " , Watterson has taken up painting , at one point drawing landscapes of the woods with his father .
Watterson has kept away from the public eye and has given no indication of resuming the strip , creating new works based on the strip 's characters , or embarking on other projects , though he has published several anthologies of " Calvin and Hobbes " strips .
He will not sign autographs or license his characters , staying true to his stated principles .
In previous years , Watterson was known to sneak autographed copies of his books onto the shelves of the Fireside Bookshop , a family-owned bookstore in his hometown of Chagrin Falls , Ohio .
However , after discovering that some were selling the autographed books online for high prices , he ended this practice as well .
Valuing privacy , he is reluctant to give interviews or make public appearances .
His lengthiest interview was featured as the cover story in " The Comics Journal " No. 127 in February 1989 .
He drew a new " Calvin and Hobbes " cover for that issue of the magazine as well .
On December 21 , 1999 , a short piece written by Watterson to mark the forthcoming end of the iconic comic strip " Peanuts " was published in the " Los Angeles Times " .
In the years that followed the end of " Calvin and Hobbes " , many attempts were made to locate Watterson in his hometown of Chagrin Falls .
Both " The Plain Dealer " and the " Cleveland Scene " sent reporters in 1998 and 2003 , respectively , but were unable to locate him .
In 2004 , Watterson and his wife Melissa bought a home in the Cleveland suburb of Cleveland Heights , Ohio .
In 2005 , they completed the move from their home in Chagrin Falls to their new residence .
In 2005 , Gene Weingarten of " The Washington Post " sent Watterson the first edition of the " Barnaby " book , as an incentive , hoping to land an interview .
Weingarten passed the book , along with a message , to Watterson 's parents , and declared he would wait in his hotel for as long as it took Watterson to contact him .
Watterson 's editor Lee Salem called the next day to tell Weingarten that the cartoonist would not be coming .
In October 2005 , Watterson answered 15 questions submitted by readers .
In October 2007 , Watterson wrote a review of " Schulz and Peanuts " , a biography of Charles Schulz , in " The Wall Street Journal " .
In 2008 , he provided a foreword for the first book collection of Richard Thompson 's " Cul De Sac " comic strip .
In early 2010 , Watterson was interviewed by " The Plain Dealer " on the 15th anniversary of the end of " Calvin and Hobbes " .
Explaining his decision to discontinue the strip , he said ,
In April 2011 , a representative for Andrews McMeel received a package from a " William Watterson in Cleveland Heights , Ohio" , which contained a 6 " x 8" oil-on-board painting of " Cul De Sac " character Petey Otterloop , done by Watterson for the " Team Cul de Sac " fundraising project for Parkinson 's Disease .
His syndicate , which has since become Universal Uclick , has said that the painting was the first new artwork from Watterson that the syndicate has seen since " Calvin and Hobbes " ended in 1995 .
In October 2013 , the magazine " Mental Floss " published an interview with Watterson , only the second since the strip ended .
Watterson again confirmed that he would not be revisiting " Calvin and Hobbes " , and that he was satisfied with his decision .
Watterson also gave his opinion on the changes in the comic book industry and where it would be headed in future :
On February 26 , 2014 , Watterson published his first cartoon since the end of " Calvin and Hobbes " : a poster for the documentary " Stripped " .
In June 2014 , three strips of " Pearls Before Swine " ( published June 4 , June 5 , and June 6 , 2014 ) featured guest illustrations by Watterson after communicating via e-mail with Stephan Pastis .
Pastis likened this unexpected collaboration to getting " a glimpse of Bigfoot . "
Watterson wrote a brief , tongue-in-cheek autobiography in the late 1980s .
Watterson was critical of the prevailing format for the Sunday comic strip that was in place when he began drawing ( and to varying degrees , still is ) .
The typical layout consists of three rows with eight total squares , which takes up half a page if published with its normal size .
Since some newspapers are restricted with space for their Sunday features , they often reduce the size of the strip .
One of the more common ways is to cut the top two panels out , which Watterson believed forced him to waste the space on throwaway jokes that did not always fit the strip .
While he was set to return from his first sabbatical , Watterson discussed with his syndicate a new format for " Calvin and Hobbes " that would enable him to use his space more efficiently and would almost require the papers his strip ran in to publish it as a half-page .
Universal agreed that they would sell the strip as the half-page and nothing else , which garnered anger from papers and criticism for Watterson from both editors and some of his fellow cartoonists ( whom he described as "unnecessarily hot tempered " ) .
Eventually , Universal compromised and agreed to offer papers a choice between the full half-page or a reduced-sized version as to alleviate concerns about the size issue .
Although Watterson conceded that this caused him to lose space in many papers , he said that in the end it was a benefit because he felt that he was giving the papers ' readers a better strip for their money and editors were free not to run " Calvin and Hobbes " at their own risk ; he added that he was not going to apologize for drawing a popular feature .
Watterson was awarded the National Cartoonists Society 's Reuben Award in both 1986 and 1988 .
Watterson 's second Reuben win made him the youngest cartoonist to be so honored , and only the fifth person to win twice , following Charles Schulz , Dik Browne , Chester Gould , and Jeff MacNelly .
( Gary Larson is the only cartoonist to win a second Reuben since Watterson . )
In 2014 , Watterson was awarded the Grand Prix at the Angoulême International Comics Festival for his body of work , becoming just the fourth non-European cartoonist to be so honored in the first 41 years of the event .
In 2001 , Watterson was contacted by the Billy Ireland Cartoon Library & Museum at Ohio State University about a possible exhibition of his work .
Watterson agreed to participate and decided to highlight his Sunday strips .
He chose thirty-six of his favorites , displaying them with both the original drawing and the colored finished product , with most pieces featuring personal annotations .
Watterson also wrote an accompanying essay that served as the foreword for the exhibit .
The exhibition was called " Calvin and Hobbes : Sunday Pages 1985-1995 " and was opened on September 10 , 2001 .
It was taken down in January 2002 , and an accompanying published catalogue with the same title as the exhibit came out as well .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
The Battle of Blenheim ( referred to in some countries as the Second Battle of Höchstädt ) , fought on 13 August 1704 , was a major battle of the War of the Spanish Succession . Louis XIV of France sought to knock Emperor Leopold out of the war by seizing Vienna , the Habsburg capital , and gain a favourable peace settlement .
The dangers to Vienna were considerable : the Elector of Bavaria and Marshal Marsin 's forces in Bavaria threatened from the west , and Marshal Vendôme 's large army in northern Italy posed a serious danger with a potential offensive through the Brenner Pass .
Vienna was also under pressure from Rákóczi 's Hungarian revolt from its eastern approaches .
Realising the danger , the Duke of Marlborough resolved to alleviate the peril to Vienna by marching his forces south from Bedburg and help maintain Emperor Leopold within the Grand Alliance .
A combination of deception and brilliant administration – designed to conceal his true destination from friend and foe alike – enabled Marlborough to march unhindered from the Low Countries to the River Danube in five weeks .
After securing Donauwörth on the Danube , Marlborough sought to engage the Elector 's and Marsin 's army before Marshal Tallard could bring reinforcements through the Black Forest .
However , with the Franco-Bavarian commanders reluctant to fight until their numbers were deemed sufficient , the Duke enacted a policy of plundering in Bavaria designed to force the issue .
The tactic proved unsuccessful , but when Tallard arrived to bolster the Elector 's army , and Prince Eugene arrived with reinforcements for the Allies , the two armies finally met on the banks of the Danube in and around the small village of Blindheim .
Blenheim has gone down in history as one of the turning points of the War of the Spanish Succession .
The overwhelming Allied victory ensured the safety of Vienna from the Franco-Bavarian army , thus preventing the collapse of the Grand Alliance .
Bavaria was knocked out of the war , and Louis 's hopes for a quick victory came to an end .
France suffered over 30,000 casualties including the commander-in-chief , Marshal Tallard , who was taken captive to England .
Before the 1704 campaign ended , the Allies had taken Landau , and the towns of Trier and Trarbach on the Moselle in preparation for the following year 's campaign into France itself .
By 1704 , the War of the Spanish Succession was in its fourth year .
The previous year had been one of success for France and her allies , most particularly on the Danube , where Marshal Villars and the Elector of Bavaria had created a direct threat to Vienna , the Habsburg capital .
Vienna had been saved by dissension between the two commanders , leading to the brilliant Villars being replaced by the less dynamic Marshal Marsin .
Nevertheless , by 1704 , the threat was still real : Rákóczi 's Hungarian revolt was already threatening the Empire 's eastern approaches , and Marshal Vendôme 's forces threatened an invasion from northern Italy .
In the courts of Versailles and Madrid , Vienna 's fall was confidently anticipated , an event which would almost certainly have led to the collapse of the Grand Alliance .
To isolate the Danube from any Allied intervention , Marshal Villeroi 's 46,000 troops were expected to pin the 70,000 Dutch and English troops around Maastricht in the Low Countries , while General de Coigny protected Alsace against surprise with a further corps .
The only forces immediately available for Vienna 's defence were Prince Louis of Baden 's force of 36,000 stationed in the Lines of Stollhofen to watch Marshal Tallard at Strasbourg ; there was also a weak force of 10,000 men under Field Marshal Count Limburg Styrum observing Ulm .
Both the Imperial Austrian Ambassador in London , Count Wratislaw , and the Duke of Marlborough realised the implications of the situation on the Danube .
The Dutch , however , who clung to their troops for their country 's protection , were against any adventurous military operation as far south as the Danube and would never willingly permit any major weakening of the forces in the Spanish Netherlands .
Marlborough , realising the only way to ignore Dutch wishes was by the use of secrecy and guile , set out to deceive his Dutch allies by pretending to simply move his troops to the Moselle – a plan approved of by The Hague – but once there , he would slip the Dutch leash and link up with Austrian forces in southern Germany .
" My intentions " , wrote the Duke from The Hague on 29 April to his governmental confidant , Sidney Godolphin , "are to march with the English to Coblenz and declare that I intend to campaign on the Moselle .
But when I come there , to write to the Dutch States that I think it absolutely necessary for the saving of the Empire to march with the troops under my command and to join with those that are in Germany ... in order to make measures with Prince Lewis of Baden for the speedy reduction of the Elector of Bavaria . "
Marlborough 's march started on 19 May from Bedburg , north-west of Cologne .
The army ( assembled by the Duke 's brother , General Charles Churchill ) consisted of 66 squadrons , 31 battalions and 38 guns and mortars totalling 21,000 men ( 16,000 of whom were English troops ) .
This force was to be augmented "en route " such that by the time Marlborough reached the Danube , it would number 40,000 ( 47 battalions , 88 squadrons ) .
Whilst Marlborough led his army , General Overkirk would maintain a defensive position in the Dutch Republic in case Villeroi mounted an attack .
The Duke had assured the Dutch that if the French were to launch an offensive he would return in good time , but Marlborough calculated that as he marched south , the French commander would be drawn after him .
In this assumption Marlborough proved correct : Villeroi shadowed the Duke with 30,000 men in 60 squadrons and 42 battalions .
The military dangers in such an enterprise were numerous : Marlborough 's lines of communication along the Rhine would be hopelessly exposed to French interference , for Louis ' generals controlled the left bank of the river and its central reaches .
Such a long march would almost certainly involve a high wastage of men and horses through exhaustion and disease .
However , Marlborough was convinced of the urgency – " I am very sensible that I take a great deal upon me" , he had earlier written to Godolphin , " but should I act otherwise , the Empire would be undone .. . "
Whilst Allied preparations had progressed , the French were striving to maintain and re-supply Marshal Marsin .
Marsin had been operating with the Elector of Bavaria against the Imperial commander , Prince Louis of Baden , and was somewhat isolated from France : his only lines of communication lay through the rocky passes of the Black Forest .
However , on 14 May , with considerable skill Marshal Tallard managed to bring 10,000 reinforcements and vast supplies and munitions through the difficult terrain , whilst outmanoeuvring Baron Thüngen , the Imperial general who sought to block his path .
Tallard then returned with his own force to the Rhine , once again side-stepping Thüngen 's efforts to intercept him .
The whole operation was an outstanding military achievement .
On 26 May , Marlborough reached Coblenz , where the Moselle meets the Rhine .
If he intended an attack along the Moselle the Duke must now turn west , but , instead , the following day the army crossed to the right bank of the Rhine , ( pausing to add 5,000 waiting Hanoverians and Prussians ) .
" There will be no campaign on the Moselle" , wrote Villeroi who had taken up a defensive position on the river , " the English have all gone up into Germany . "
A second possible objective now occurred to the French – an Allied incursion into Alsace and an attack on the city of Strasbourg .
Marlborough skillfully encouraged this apprehension by constructing bridges across the Rhine at Philippsburg , a ruse that not only encouraged Villeroi to come to Tallard 's aid in the defence of Alsace , but one that ensured the French plan to march on Vienna remained paralysed by uncertainty .
With Villeroi shadowing Marlborough 's every move , Marlborough 's gamble that the French would not move against the weakened Dutch position in the Netherlands paid off .
In any case , Marlborough had promised to return to the Netherlands if a French attack developed there , transferring his troops down the Rhine on barges at a rate of a day .
Encouraged by this promise ( whatever it was worth ) the States-General agreed to release the Danish contingent of seven battalions and 22 squadrons as a reinforcement .
Marlborough reached Ladenburg , in the plain of the Neckar and the Rhine , and there halted for three days to rest his cavalry and allow the guns and infantry to close up .
On 6 June he arrived at Wiesloch , south of Heidelberg .
The following day , the Allied army swung away from the Rhine towards the hills of the Swabian Jura and the Danube beyond .
At last Marlborough 's destination was established without doubt .
On 10 June , the Duke met for the first time the President of the Imperial War Council , Prince Eugene – accompanied by Count Wratislaw – at the village of Mundelsheim , half-way between the Danube and the Rhine .
By 13 June , the Imperial Field Commander , Prince Louis of Baden , had joined them in Großheppach .
The three generals commanded a force of nearly 110,000 men .
At conference it was decided that Eugene would return with 28,000 men to the Lines of Stollhofen on the Rhine to keep an eye on Villeroi and Tallard , and prevent them going to the aid of the Franco-Bavarian army on the Danube .
Meanwhile , Marlborough 's and Baden 's forces would combine , totalling 80,000 men , for the march on the Danube to seek out the Elector and Marsin before they could be reinforced .
Knowing Marlborough 's destination , Tallard and Villeroi met at Landau in Alsace on 13 June to rapidly construct an action plan to save Bavaria , but the rigidity of the French command system was such that any variations from the original plan had to be sanctioned by Versailles .
The Count of Mérode-Westerloo , commander of the Flemish troops in Tallard 's army wrote – " One thing is certain : we delayed our march from Alsace for far too long and quite inexplicably . "
Approval from Louis arrived on 27 June : Tallard was to reinforce Marsin and the Elector on the Danube via the Black Forest , with 40 battalions and 50 squadrons ; Villeroi was to pin down the Allies defending the Lines of Stollhofen , or , if the Allies should move all their forces to the Danube , he was to join with Marshal Tallard ; and General de Coignies with 8,000 men , would protect Alsace .
On 1 July Tallard 's army of 35,000 re-crossed the Rhine at Kehl and began its march .
Meanwhile , on 22 June , Marlborough 's forces linked up with Baden 's Imperial forces at Launsheim .
A distance of had been covered in five weeks .
Thanks to a carefully planned time-table , the effects of wear and tear had been kept to a minimum .
Captain Parker described the march discipline – " As we marched through the country of our Allies , commissars were appointed to furnish us with all manner of necessaries for man and horse ... the soldiers had nothing to do but pitch their tents , boil kettles and lie down to rest . "
In response to Marlborough 's manoeuvres , the Elector and Marsin , conscious of their numerical disadvantage with only 40,000 men , moved their forces to the entrenched camp at Dillingen on the north bank of the Danube .
Marlborough could not attack Dillingen because of a lack of siege guns – he was unable to bring any from the Low Countries , and Baden had failed to supply any despite assurances to the contrary .
The Allies , nevertheless , needed a base for provisions and a good river crossing .
On 2 July , therefore , Marlborough stormed the key fortress of Schellenberg on the heights above the town of Donauwörth .
Count Jean d'Arco had been sent with 12,000 men from the Franco-Bavarian camp to hold the town and grassy hill , but after a ferocious and bloody battle , inflicting enormous casualties on both sides , Schellenberg finally succumbed , forcing Donauwörth to surrender shortly afterwards .
The Elector , knowing his position at Dillingen was now not tenable , took up a position behind the strong fortifications of Augsburg .
Tallard 's march , meanwhile , presented a dilemma for Eugene .
If the Allies were not to be outnumbered on the Danube , Eugene realised he must either try to cut Tallard off before he could get there , or , he must hasten to reinforce Marlborough .
However , if he withdrew from the Rhine to the Danube , Villeroi might also make a move south to link up with the Elector and Marsin .
Eugene compromised : leaving 12,000 troops behind guarding the Lines of Stollhofen , he marched off with the rest of his army to forestall Tallard .
Lacking in numbers , Eugene could not seriously disrupt Tallard 's march ; nevertheless , the French Marshal 's progress was proving pitifully slow .
Tallard 's force had suffered considerably more than Marlborough 's troops on their march – many of his cavalry horses were suffering from glanders , and the mountain passes were proving tough for the 2,000 wagons of provisions .
Local German peasants , angry at French plundering , compounded Tallard 's problems , leading Mérode-Westerloo to bemoan – " the enraged peasantry killed several thousand of our men before the army was clear of the Black Forest . "
Additionally , Tallard had insisted on besieging the little town of Villingen for six days ( 16–22 July ) , but abandoned the enterprise on discovering the approach of Eugene .
The Elector in Augsburg was informed on 14 July that Tallard was on his way through the Black Forest .
This good news bolstered the Elector 's policy of inaction , further encouraging him to wait for the reinforcements .
But this reticence to fight induced Marlborough to undertake a controversial policy of spoliation in Bavaria , burning buildings and crops throughout the rich lands south of the Danube .
This had two aims : firstly to put pressure on the Elector to fight or come to terms before Tallard arrived with reinforcements ; and secondly , to ruin Bavaria as a base from which the French and Bavarian armies could attack Vienna , or pursue the Duke into Franconia if , at some stage , he had to withdraw northwards .
But this destruction , coupled with a protracted siege of Rain ( 9–16 July ) , caused Prince Eugene to lament " ... since the Donauwörth action I cannot admire their performances " , and later to conclude " If he has to go home without having achieved his objective , he will certainly be ruined . "
Nevertheless , strategically the Duke had been able to place his numerically stronger forces between the Franco-Bavarian army and Vienna .
Marshal Tallard , with 34,000 men , reached Ulm , joining with the Elector and Marsin in Augsburg on 5 August ( although Tallard was not impressed to find that the Elector had dispersed his army in response to Marlborough 's campaign of ravaging the region ) .
Also on 5 August , Eugene reached Höchstädt , riding that same night to meet with Marlborough at Schrobenhausen .
Marlborough knew it was necessary that another crossing point over the Danube would be required in case Donauwörth fell to the enemy .
On 7 August , therefore , the first of Baden 's 15,000 Imperial troops ( the remainder following two days later ) left Marlborough 's main force to besiege the heavily defended city of Ingolstadt , farther down the Danube .
With Eugene 's forces at Höchstädt on the north bank of the Danube , and Marlborough 's at Rain on the south bank , Tallard and the Elector debated their next move .
Tallard preferred to bide his time , replenish supplies and allow Marlborough 's Danube campaign to flounder in the colder weeks of Autumn ; the Elector and Marsin , however , newly reinforced , were keen to push ahead .
The French and Bavarian commanders eventually agreed on a plan and decided to attack Eugene 's smaller force .
On 9 August , the Franco-Bavarian forces began to cross to the north bank of the Danube .
On 10 August , Eugene sent an urgent dispatch reporting that he was falling back to Donauwörth – " The enemy have marched .
It is almost certain that the whole army is crossing the Danube at Lauingen ... The plain of Dillingen is crowded with troops ... Everything , milord , consists in speed and that you put yourself forthwith in movement to join me tomorrow , without which I fear it will be too late . "
By a series of brilliant marches Marlborough concentrated his forces on Donauwörth and , by noon 11 August , the link-up was complete .
During 11 August , Tallard pushed forward from the river crossings at Dillingen ; by 12 August , the Franco-Bavarian forces were encamped behind the small river Nebel near the village of Blenheim on the plain of Höchstädt .
That same day Marlborough and Eugene carried out their own reconnaissance of the French position from the church spire at Tapfheim , and moved their combined forces to Münster – five miles ( 8 km ) from the French camp .
A French reconnaissance under the Marquis de Silly went forward to probe the enemy , but were driven off by Allied troops who had deployed to cover the pioneers of the advancing army , labouring to bridge the numerous streams in the area and improve the passage leading westwards to Höchstädt .
Marlborough quickly moved forward two brigades under the command of General Wilkes and Brigadier Rowe to secure the narrow strip of land between the Danube and the wooded Fuchsberg hill , at the Schwenningen defile .
Tallard 's army numbered 56,000 men and 90 guns ; the army of the Grand Alliance , 52,000 men and 66 guns .
Some Allied officers who were acquainted with the superior numbers of the enemy , and aware of their strong defensive position , ventured to remonstrate with Marlborough about the hazards of attacking ; but the Duke was resolute – " I know the danger , yet a battle is absolutely necessary , and I rely on the bravery and discipline of the troops , which will make amends for our disadvantages " .
Marlborough and Eugene decided to risk everything , and agreed to attack on the following day .
The extreme right flank of the Franco-Bavarian army was covered by the Danube ; to the extreme left flank lay the undulating pine-covered hills of the Swabian Jura .
A small stream , the Nebel , ( the ground either side of which was soft and marshy and only fordable intermittently ) , fronted the French line .
The French right rested on the village of Blenheim near where the Nebel flows into the Danube ; the village itself was surrounded by hedges , fences , enclosed gardens , and meadows .
Between Blenheim and the next village of Oberglauheim the fields of wheat had been cut to stubble and were now ideal to deploy troops .
From Oberglauheim to the next hamlet of Lutzingen the terrain of ditches , thickets and brambles was potentially difficult ground for the attackers .
At 02:00 on 13 August , 40 squadrons were sent forward towards the enemy , followed at 03:00 , in eight columns , by the main Allied force pushing over the Kessel .
At about 06 :00 they reached Schwenningen , two miles ( 3 km ) from Blenheim .
The English and German troops who had held Schwenningen through the night joined the march , making a ninth column on the left of the army .
The Allied commanders agreed that Marlborough would command 36,000 troops and attack Tallard 's force of 33,000 on the left ( including capturing the village of Blenheim ) , whilst Eugene , commanding 16,000 men would attack the Elector and Marsin 's combined forces of 23,000 troops on the right wing ; if this attack was pressed hard the Elector and Marsin would have no troops to send to aid Tallard on their right .
Lieutenant-General John Cutts would attack Blenheim in concert with Eugene 's attack .
With the French flanks busy , Marlborough could cross the Nebel and deliver the fatal blow to the French at their centre .
However , Marlborough would have to wait until Eugene was in position before the general engagement could begin .
The last thing Tallard expected that morning was to be attacked by the Allies – deceived by intelligence gathered from prisoners taken by de Silly the previous day , and assured in their strong natural position , Tallard and his colleagues were convinced that Marlborough and Eugene were about to retreat north-eastwards towards Nördlingen .
Tallard wrote a report to this effect to King Louis that morning , but hardly had he sent the messenger when the Allied army began to appear opposite his camp .
" I could see the enemy advancing ever closer in nine great columns " , wrote Mérode-Westerloo , " ... filling the whole plain from the Danube to the woods on the horizon . "
Signal guns were fired to bring in the foraging parties and picquets as the French and Bavarian troops tried to draw into battle-order to face the unexpected threat .
At about 08:00 the French artillery on their right wing opened fire , answered by Colonel Blood 's batteries .
The guns were heard by Baden in his camp before Ingolstadt , " The Prince and the Duke are engaged today to the westward" , he wrote to the Emperor .
An hour later Tallard , the Elector , and Marsin climbed Blenheim 's church tower to finalise their plans .
It was settled that the Elector and Marsin would hold the front from the hills to Oberglauheim , whilst Tallard would defend the ground between Oberglauheim and the Danube .
The French commanders were , however , divided as to how to utilise the Nebel : Tallard 's tactic – opposed by Marsin and the Elector who felt it better to close their infantry right up to the stream itself – was to lure the allies across before unleashing their cavalry upon them , causing panic and confusion ; whilst the enemy was struggling in the marshes , they would be caught in crossfire from Blenheim and Oberglauheim .
The plan was sound if all its parts were implemented , but it allowed Marlborough to cross the Nebel without serious interference and fight the battle he had in mind .
In the village of Lutzingen , Count Maffei positioned five Bavarian battalions with a great battery of 16 guns at the village 's edge .
In the woods to the left of Lutzingen , seven French battalions under the Marquis de Rozel moved into place .
Between Lutzingen and Oberglauheim the Elector placed 27 squadrons of cavalry – Count d'Arco commanded 14 Bavarian squadrons and Count Wolframsdorf had 13 more in support nearby .
To their right stood Marsin 's 40 French squadrons and 12 battalions .
The village of Oberglauheim was packed with 14 battalions commanded by the Marquis de Blainville ( including the effective Irish Brigade known as the ' Wild Geese ' ) .
Six batteries of guns were ranged alongside the village .
On the right of these French and Bavarian positions , between Oberglauheim and Blenheim , Tallard deployed 64 French and Walloon squadrons ( 16 drawn from Marsin ) supported by nine French battalions standing near the Höchstädt road .
In the cornfield next to Blenheim stood three battalions from the Regiment de Roi .
Nine battalions occupied the village itself , commanded by the Marquis de Clérambault .
Four battalions stood to the rear and a further 11 were in reserve .
These battalions were supported by Hautefeuille 's 12 squadrons of dismounted dragoons .
By 11:00 Tallard , the Elector , and Marsin were in place .
Many of the Allied generals were hesitant to attack such a relatively strong position .
The Earl of Orkney later confessed that , "had I been asked to give my opinion , I had been against it . "
Prince Eugene was expected to be in position by 11:00 , but due to the difficult terrain and enemy fire , progress was slow .
Lord Cutts ' column – who by 10:00 had expelled the enemy from two water mills upon the Nebel – had already deployed by the river against Blenheim , enduring over the next three hours severe fire from a heavy six-gun battery posted near the village .
The rest of Marlborough 's army , waiting in their ranks on the forward slope , were also forced to bear the cannonade from the French artillery , suffering 2,000 casualties before the attack could even be begun .
Meanwhile engineers repaired a stone bridge across the Nebel , and constructed five additional bridges or causeways across the marsh between Blenheim and Oberglauheim .
Marlborough 's anxiety was finally allayed when , just past noon , Colonel Cadogan reported that Eugene 's Prussian and Danish infantry were in place – the order for the general advance was given .
At 13 :00 , Cutts was ordered to attack the village of Blenheim whilst Prince Eugene was requested to assault Lutzingen on the Allied right flank .
Cutts ordered Brigadier-General Archibald Rowe 's brigade to attack .
The English infantry rose from the edge of the Nebel , and silently marched towards Blenheim , a distance of some .
John Ferguson 's English brigade supported Rowe 's left , and moved in perfect order towards the barricades between the village and the river , defended by Hautefeuille 's dragoons .
As the range closed to within , the French fired a deadly volley .
Rowe had ordered that there should be no firing from his men until he struck his sword upon the palisades , but as he stepped forward to give the signal , he fell mortally wounded .
The survivors of the leading companies closed up the gaps in their torn ranks and rushed forward .
Small parties penetrated the defences , but repeated French volleys forced the English back towards the Nebel , sustaining heavy casualties .
As the attack faltered , eight squadrons of elite Gens d'Armes , commanded by the veteran Swiss officer , Beat-Jacques von Zurlauben , fell upon the English troops , cutting at the exposed flank of Rowe 's own regiment .
However , Wilkes ' Hessian brigade , lying nearby in the marshy grass at the water 's edge , stood firm and repulsed the Gens d'Armes with steady fire , enabling the English and Hessians to re-order and launch another attack .
Although the Allies were again repulsed , these persistent attacks on Blenheim eventually bore fruit , panicking Clérambault into making the worst French error of the day .
Without consulting Tallard , Clérambault ordered his reserve battalions into the village , upsetting the balance of the French position and nullifying the French numerical superiority .
" The men were so crowded in upon one another " , wrote Mérode-Westerloo , " that they could n't even fire – let alone receive or carry out any orders . "
Marlborough , spotting this error , now countermanded Cutts ' intention to launch a third attack , and ordered him simply to contain the enemy within Blenheim ; no more than 5,000 Allied soldiers were able to pen in twice the number of French infantry and dragoons .
On the Allied right , Eugene 's Prussian and Danish forces were desperately fighting the numerically superior forces of the Elector and Marsin .
The Prince of Anhalt-Dessau led forward four brigades across the Nebel to assault the well-fortified position of Lutzingen .
Here , the Nebel was less of an obstacle , but the great battery positioned on the edge of the village enjoyed a good field of fire across the open ground stretching to the hamlet of Schwennenbach .
As soon as the infantry crossed the stream , they were struck by Maffei 's infantry , and salvoes from the Bavarian guns positioned both in front of the village and in enfilade on the wood-line to the right .
Despite heavy casualties the Prussians attempted to storm the great battery , whilst the Danes , under Count Scholten , attempted to drive the French infantry out of the copses beyond the village .
With the infantry heavily engaged , Eugene 's cavalry picked its way across the Nebel .
After an initial success , his first line of cavalry , under the Imperial General of Horse , Prince Maximilian of Hanover , were pressed by the second line of Marsin 's cavalry , and were forced back across the Nebel in confusion .
Nevertheless , the exhausted French were unable to follow up their advantage , and the two cavalry forces tried to regroup and reorder their ranks .
However , without cavalry support , and threatened with envelopment , the Prussian and Danish infantry were in turn forced to pull back across the Nebel .
Panic gripped some of Eugene 's troops as they crossed the stream .
Ten infantry colours were lost to the Bavarians , and hundreds of prisoners taken ; it was only through the leadership of Eugene and the Prussian Prince that the imperial infantry were prevented from abandoning the field .
After rallying his troops near Schwennenbach – well beyond their starting point – Eugene prepared to launch a second attack , led by the second-line squadrons under the Duke of Württemberg-Teck .
Yet again they were caught in the murderous cross-fire from the artillery in Lutzingen and Oberglauheim , and were once again thrown back in disarray .
The French and Bavarians , however , were almost as disordered as their opponents , and they too were in need of inspiration from their commander , the Elector , who was seen – " ... riding up and down , and inspiring his men with fresh courage . "
Anhalt-Dessau 's Danish and Prussian infantry attacked a second time but could not sustain the advance without proper support .
Once again they fell back across the stream .
Whilst these events around Blenheim and Lutzingen were taking place , Marlborough was preparing to cross the Nebel .
The centre , commanded by the Duke 's brother , General Charles Churchill , consisted of 18 battalions of infantry arranged in two lines : seven battalions in the front line to secure a foothold across the Nebel , and 11 battalions in the rear providing cover from the Allied side of the stream .
Between the infantry were placed two lines , 72 squadrons of cavalry .
The first line of foot was to pass the stream first and march as far to the other side as could be conveniently done .
This line would then form and cover the passage of the horse , leaving gaps in the line of infantry large enough for the cavalry to pass through and take their position in front .
Once again Zurlauben 's Gens d'Armes charged , looking to rout Lumley 's English cavalry who linked Cutts ' column facing Blenheim with Churchill 's infantry .
As these elite French cavalry attacked , they were faced by five English squadrons under Colonel Francis Palmes .
To the consternation of the French , the Gens d'Armes were pushed back in terrible confusion , pursued well beyond the Maulweyer stream that flows through Blenheim .
exclaimed the Elector , " the gentlemen of France fleeing ? " Palmes , however , attempted to follow up his success but was repulsed in some confusion by other French cavalry , and musketry fire from the edge of Blenheim .
Nevertheless , Tallard was alarmed by the repulse of the elite Gens d'Armes and urgently rode across the field to ask Marsin for reinforcements ; but on the basis of being hard pressed by Eugene – whose second attack was in full flood – Marsin refused .
As Tallard consulted with Marsin , more of his infantry was being taken into Blenheim by Clérambault .
Fatally , Tallard , aware of the situation , did nothing to rectify this grave mistake , leaving him with just the nine battalions of infantry near the Höchstädt road
to oppose the massed enemy ranks in the centre .
Zurlauben tried several more times to disrupt the Allies forming on Tallard 's side of the stream ; his front-line cavalry darting forward down the gentle slope towards the Nebel .
But the attacks lacked co-ordination , and the Allied infantry 's steady volleys disconcerted the French horsemen .
During these skirmishes Zurlauben fell mortally wounded , and died two days later .
The Danish cavalry , under the Duke of Württemberg-Neuenstadt ( not to be confused with the Duke of Württemberg who fought with Eugene ) , had made slow work of crossing the Nebel near Oberglau ; harassed by Marsin 's infantry near the village , the Danes were driven back across the stream .
Count Horn 's Dutch infantry managed to push the French back from the water 's edge , but it was apparent that before Marlborough could launch his main effort against Tallard , Oberglauheim would have to be secured .
Count Horn directed the Prince of Holstein-Beck to take the village , but his two Dutch brigades were cut down by the French and Irish troops , capturing and badly wounding the Prince during the action .
If Holstein-Beck 's Dutch column were destroyed , the Allied army would be split in two : Eugene 's wing would be isolated from Marlborough 's , passing the initiative to the Franco-Bavarian forces now engaged across the whole plain .
Seeing the opportunity , Marsin ordered his cavalry to change from facing Eugene , and turn towards their right and the open flank of Churchill 's infantry drawn up in front of Unterglau .
Marlborough ( who had crossed the Nebel on a makeshift bridge to take personal control ) , ordered Hulsen 's Hanoverian battalions to support the Dutch infantry .
A Dutch cavalry brigade under Averock was also called forward but soon came under pressure from Marsin 's more numerous squadrons .
Marlborough now requested Eugene to release Count Hendrick Fugger and his Imperial Cuirassier brigade to help repel the French cavalry thrust .
Despite his own desperate struggle , the Imperial Prince at once complied , demonstrating the high degree of confidence and mutual co-operation between the two generals .
Although the Nebel stream lay between Fugger 's and Marsin 's squadrons , the French were forced to change front to meet this new threat , thus forestalling the chance for Marsin to strike at Marlborough 's infantry .
Fugger 's cuirassiers charged and , striking at a favourable angle , threw back Marsin 's squadrons in disorder .
With support from Colonel Blood 's batteries , the Hessian , Hanoverian and Dutch infantry – now commanded by Count Berensdorf – succeeded in pushing the French and Irish infantry back into Oberglauheim so that they could not again threaten Churchill 's flank as he moved against Tallard .
The French commander in the village , the Marquis de Blainville , numbered amongst the heavy casualties .
By 16 :00 , with the enemy troops besieged in Blenheim and Oberglau , the Allied centre of 81 squadrons ( nine squadrons had been transferred from Cutts ' column ) , supported by 18 battalions was firmly planted amidst the French line of 64 squadrons and nine battalions of raw recruits .
There was now a pause in the battle : Marlborough wanted to concert the attack upon the whole front , and Eugene , after his second repulse , needed time to reorganize .
Just after 17 :00 all was ready along the Allied front .
Marlborough 's two lines of cavalry had now moved to the front of the Duke 's line of battle , with the two supporting lines of infantry behind them .
Mérode-Westerloo attempted to extricate some French infantry crowded in Blenheim , but Clérambault ordered the troops back into the village .
The French cavalry exerted themselves once more against the first line – Lumley 's English and Scots on the Allied left , and Hompesch 's Dutch and German squadrons on the Allied right .
Tallard 's squadrons , lacking infantry support , were tired and ragged but managed to push the Allied first line back to their infantry support .
With the battle still not won , Marlborough had to rebuke one of his cavalry officers who was attempting to leave the field – " Sir , you are under a mistake , the enemy lies that way .. . " Now , at the Duke 's command , the second Allied line under von Bulow and the Count of Ost-Friese was ordered forward , and , driving through the centre , the Allies finally put Tallard 's tired horse to rout , not without cost .
The Prussian Life Dragoons ' Colonel , Ludwig von Blumenthal , and his 2nd in command , Lt . Col . von Hacke , fell next to each other .
But the charge succeeded and with their cavalry in headlong flight , the remaining nine French infantry battalions fought with desperate valour , trying to form square .
The French battalions were overwhelmed by Colonel Blood 's close-range artillery and platoon fire .
Mérode-Westerloo later wrote – " died to a man where they stood , stationed right out in the open plain – supported by nobody . "
The majority of Tallard 's retreating troops headed for Höchstädt but most did not make the safety of the town , plunging instead into the Danube where upwards of 3,000 French horsemen drowned ; others were cut down by the pursuing cavalry .
The Marquis de Gruignan attempted a counter-attack , but he was easily brushed aside by the triumphant Allies .
After a final rally behind his camp 's tents , shouting entreaties to stand and fight , Marshal Tallard was caught up in the rout and pushed towards Sonderheim .
Surrounded by a squadron of Hessian troops , Tallard surrendered to Lieutenant-Colonel de Boinenburg , the Prince of Hesse-Kassel 's "aide-de-camp" , and was sent under escort to Marlborough .
The Duke welcomed the French commander – " I am very sorry that such a cruel misfortune should have fallen upon a soldier for whom I have the highest regard . "
With salutes and courtesies , the Marshal was escorted to Marlborough 's coach .
Meanwhile the Allies had once again attacked the Bavarian stronghold at Lutzingen .
Eugene , however , became exasperated with the performance of his Imperial cavalry whose third attack had failed : he had already shot two of his troopers to prevent a general flight .
Then , declaring in disgust that he wished to "fight among brave men and not among cowards " , Eugene went into the attack with the Prussian and Danish infantry , as did the Dessauer , waving a regimental colour to inspire his troops .
This time the Prussians were able to storm the great Bavarian battery , and overwhelm the guns ' crews .
Beyond the village , Scholten 's Danes defeated the French infantry in a desperate hand-to-hand bayonet struggle .
When they saw that the centre had broken , the Elector and Marsin decided the battle was lost and , like the remnants of Tallard 's army , fled the battlefield ( albeit in better order than Tallard 's men ) .
Attempts to organise an Allied force to prevent Marsin 's withdrawal failed owing to the exhaustion of the cavalry , and the growing confusion in the field .
Marlborough now had to turn his attention from the fleeing enemy to direct Churchill to detach more infantry to storm Blenheim .
Orkney 's infantry , Hamilton 's English brigade and St Paul 's Hanoverians moved across the trampled wheat to the cottages .
Fierce hand-to-hand fighting gradually forced the French towards the village centre , in and around the walled churchyard which had been prepared for defence .
Hay and Ross 's dismounted dragoons were also sent , but suffered under a counter-charge delivered by the regiments of Artois and Provence under command of Colonel de la Silvière .
Colonel Belville 's Hanoverians were fed into the battle to steady the resolve of the dragoons , and once more went to the attack .
The Allied progress was slow and hard , and like the defenders , they suffered many casualties .
Many of the cottages were now burning , obscuring the field of fire and driving the defenders out of their positions .
Hearing the din of battle in Blenheim , Tallard sent a message to Marlborough offering to order the garrison to withdraw from the field .
" Inform Monsieur Tallard" , replied the Duke , " that , in the position in which he is now , he has no command . "
Nevertheless , as dusk came the Allied commander was anxious for a quick conclusion .
The French infantry fought tenaciously to hold on to their position in Blenheim , but their commander was nowhere to be found .
Clérambault 's insistence on confining his huge force in the village was to seal his fate that day .
Realising his tactical mistake had contributed to Tallard 's defeat in the centre , Clérambault deserted Blenheim and the 27 battalions defending the village , and reportedly drowned in the Danube while attempting to make his escape .
By now Blenheim was under assault from every side by three English generals : Cutts , Churchill , and Orkney .
The French had repulsed every attack with heavy slaughter , but many had seen what had happened on the plain and what its consequences to them would be ; their army was routed and they were cut off .
Orkney , attacking from the rear , now tried a different tactic – " ... it came into my head to beat parley" , he later wrote , " which they accepted of and immediately their Brigadier de Nouville capitulated with me to be prisoner at discretion and lay down their arms . "
Threatened by Allied guns , other units followed their example .
However , it was not until 21:00 that the Marquis de Blanzac , who had taken charge in Clérambault 's absence , reluctantly accepted the inevitability of defeat , and some 10,000 of France 's best infantry had laid down their arms .
During these events Marlborough was still in the saddle conducting the pursuit of the broken enemy .
Pausing for a moment he scribbled on the back of an old tavern bill a note addressed to his wife , Sarah : " I have no time to say more but to beg you will give my duty to the Queen , and let her know her army has had a glorious victory . "
French losses were immense : over 30,000 killed , wounded and missing .
Moreover , the myth of French invincibility had been destroyed and Louis 's hopes of an early and victorious peace had been wrenched from his grasp.
Mérode-Westerloo summarised the case against Tallard 's army : " The French lost this battle for a wide variety of reasons .
For one thing they had too good an opinion of their own ability ... Another point was their faulty field dispositions , and in addition there was rampant indiscipline and inexperience displayed ... It took all these faults to lose so celebrated a battle . "
It was a hard-fought contest , leading Prince Eugene to observe – " I have not a squadron or battalion which did not charge four times at least . "
Nevertheless , although the war dragged on for years , the Battle of Blenheim was probably its most decisive victory ; Marlborough and Eugene , working indivisibly together , had saved the Habsburg Empire and thereby preserved the Grand Alliance from collapse .
Munich , Augsburg , Ingolstadt , Ulm and all remaining territory of Bavaria soon fell to the Allies .
By the Treaty of Ilbersheim , signed 7 November 1704 , Bavaria was placed under Austrian military rule , allowing the Habsburgs to utilise its resources for the rest of the conflict .
The remnants of the Elector of Bavaria 's and Marshal Marsin 's wing limped back to Strasbourg , losing another 7,000 men through desertion .
Despite being offered the chance to remain as ruler of Bavaria ( under strict terms of an alliance with Austria ) , the Elector left his country and family in order to continue the war against the Allies from the Spanish Netherlands where he still held the post of governor-general .
Their commander-in-chief that day , Marshal Tallard – who , unlike his subordinates , had not been ransomed or exchanged – was taken to England and imprisoned in Nottingham until his release in 1711 .
The 1704 campaign lasted considerably longer than usual as the Allies sought to wring out maximum advantage .
Realising that France was too powerful to be forced to make peace by a single victory , however , Eugene , Marlborough and Baden met to plan their next moves .
For the following year the Duke proposed a campaign along the valley of the River Moselle to carry the war deep into France .
This required the capture of the major fortress of Landau which guarded the Rhine , and the towns of Trier and Trarbach on the Moselle itself .
Trier was taken on 26 October and Landau fell on 23 November to the Margrave of Baden and Prince Eugene ; with the fall of Trarbach on 20 December , the campaign season for 1704 came to an end .
Marlborough returned to England on 14 December ( O.S) to the acclamation of Queen Anne and the country .
In the first days of January the 110 cavalry standards and the 128 infantry colours that were taken during the battle were borne in procession to Westminster Hall .
In February 1705 , Queen Anne , who had made Marlborough a Duke in 1702 , granted him the Park of Woodstock and promised a sum of £240,000 to build a suitable house as a gift from a grateful crown in recognition of his victory – a victory which British historian Sir Edward Shepherd Creasy considered one of the pivotal battles in history , writing – " Had it not been for Blenheim , all Europe might at this day suffer under the effect of French conquests resembling those of Alexander in extent and those of the Romans in durability . "
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
The Bantu languages , technically the Narrow Bantu languages , constitute a traditional sub-branch of the Niger–Congo languages .
There are about 250 Bantu languages by the criterion of mutual intelligibility , though the distinction between language and dialect is often unclear , and "Ethnologue " counts 535 languages .
Bantu languages are spoken largely east and south of the present day country of Cameroon ; i .e . , in the regions commonly known as Central Africa , Southeast Africa , and Southern Africa .
Parts of the Bantu area include languages from other language families ( see map ) .
The Bantu language with the largest total number of speakers is Swahili ; however , nearly all speakers know it as a second language .
According to Ethnologue , there are over 40 million L2 ( second-language ) speakers , but only about 2 million native speakers .
According to Ethnologue , Shona is the most widely spoken as a first language , with 10.8 million speakers , followed closely by Zulu , with 10.3 million .
Ethnologue also lists Manyika and Ndau as separate languages , though Shona speakers consider them to be two of the five main dialects of Shona .
If the 3.4 million Manyika and Ndau speakers are included among the Shona , then Shona totals 14.2 million first-language speakers .
Ethnologue separates Kinyarwanda and Kirundi , which are largely mutually intelligible and hence often considered dialects of a single Rwanda-Rundi language .
These two , grouped together , have 12.4 million speakers according to Ethnologue .
Other estimates may be significantly larger or smaller .
Estimates of number of speakers of most languages vary widely , due both to the lack of accurate statistics in most third-world countries and the difficulty in defining exactly where the boundaries of a language lie , particularly in the presence of a dialect continuum .
The Bantu languages descend from a common Proto-Bantu language , which is believed to have been spoken in what is now Cameroon in West Africa .
An estimated 2,500–3,000 years ago ( 500 BC to 1000 BC ) , although other sources put the start of the Bantu Expansion closer to 3000 BC , speakers of the Proto-Bantu language began a series of migrations eastward and southward , carrying agriculture with them .
This Bantu expansion came to dominate Sub-Saharan Africa east of Cameroon , an area where Bantu peoples now constitute nearly the entire population .
The technical term Bantu , meaning "human beings " or in simplistic terms "people" , was first used by Wilhelm Heinrich Immanuel Bleek ( 1827–1875 ) , as this is reflected in many of the languages of this group .
A common characteristic of Bantu languages is that they use words such as "muntu" or "mutu" for "human being " or in simplistic terms "person" , and the plural prefix for human nouns starting with "mu-" ( class 1 ) in most languages is "ba-" ( class 2 ) , thus giving "bantu" for "people " .
Bleek , and later Carl Meinhof , pursued extensive studies comparing the grammatical structures of Bantu languages .
The term 'narrow Bantu' was coined by the " Benue–Congo Working Group " to distinguish Bantu as recognized by Malcolm Guthrie in his seminal 1948 classification of the Bantu languages , from the Bantoid languages not recognized as Bantu by Guthrie ( 1948 ) .
In recent times , the distinctiveness of Narrow Bantu as opposed to the other Southern Bantoid groups has been called into doubt ( cf .
Piron 1995 , Williamson & Blench 2000 , Blench 2011 ) , but the term is still widely used .
A coherent classification of Narrow Bantu will likely need to exclude many of the Zone A and perhaps Zone B languages .
There is no true genealogical classification of the ( Narrow ) Bantu languages .
Most attempted classifications are problematic in that they consider only languages which happen to fall within traditional Narrow Bantu , rather than South Bantoid , which has been established as a unit by the comparative method .
The most widely used classification , the alphanumeric coding system developed by Guthrie , is mainly geographic .
At a broader level , the family is commonly split in two depending on the reflexes of proto-Bantu tone patterns : Many Bantuists group together parts of zones A through D ( the extent depending on the author ) as " Northwest Bantu" or " Forest Bantu" , and the remainder as " Central Bantu" or " Savanna Bantu" .
The two groups have been described as having mirror-image tone systems : Where Northwest Bantu has a high tone in a cognate , Central Bantu languages generally have a low tone , and vice versa .
Northwest Bantu is more divergent internally than Central Bantu , and perhaps less conservative due to contact with non-Bantu Niger–Congo languages ; Central Bantu is likely the innovative line cladistically .
Northwest Bantu is clearly not a coherent family , but even for Central Bantu the evidence is lexical , with little evidence that it is a historically valid group .
The only attempt at a detailed genetic classification to replace the Guthrie system is the 1999 " Tervuren " proposal of Bastin , Coupez , and Mann .
However , it relies on lexicostatistics , which , because of its reliance on similarity rather than shared innovations , may predict spurious groups of conservative languages which are not closely related .
Meanwhile , "Ethnologue " has added languages to the Guthrie classification that Guthrie overlooked , while removing the Mbam languages ( much of zone A) , and shifting some languages between groups ( much of zones D and E to a new zone J , for example , and part of zone L to K , and part of M to F) in an apparent effort at a semi-genetic , or at least semi-areal , classification .
This has been criticized for sowing confusion in one of the few unambiguous ways to distinguish Bantu languages .
Nurse & Philippson ( 2006 ) evaluate many proposals for low-level groups of Bantu languages , but the result is not a complete portrayal of the family .
" Glottolog " has incorporated many of these into their classification .
Nonetheless , some version of zone S ( Southern Bantu) does appear to be a coherent group .
The languages which share Dahl 's Law may also form a valid group , Northeast Bantu .
The infobox at right lists these together with various low-level groups that are fairly uncontroversial , though they continue to be revised .
The development of a rigorous genealogical classification of many branches of Niger–Congo , not just Bantu , is hampered by insufficient data .
Guthrie reconstructed both the phonemic inventory and the core vocabulary of Proto-Bantu .
The most prominent grammatical characteristic of Bantu languages is the extensive use of affixes ( see Sotho grammar and Ganda noun classes for detailed discussions of these affixes ) .
Each noun belongs to a class , and each language may have several numbered classes , somewhat like genders in European languages .
The class is indicated by a prefix that is part of the noun , as well as agreement markers on verb and qualificative roots connected with the noun .
Plural is indicated by a change of class , with a resulting change of prefix .
The verb has a number of prefixes , though in the western languages these are often treated as independent words .
In Swahili , for example , " Mtoto mdogo amekisoma" , ( also " Kamwana kadoko kariverenga " in Shona language ) means ' The small child has read it book ' .
" Mtoto " 'child ' governs the adjective prefix "m-" and the verb subject prefix "a-" .
Then comes perfect tense "-me-" and an object marker "-ki-" agreeing with implicit "kitabu " 'book ' .
Pluralizing to 'children' gives " Watoto wadogo wamekisoma " ( "Vana vadoko variverenga " in Shona ) , and pluralizing to 'books ' ( "vitabu" ) gives " Watoto wadogo wamevisoma" .
Bantu words are typically made up of open syllables of the type CV ( consonant-vowel ) with most languages having syllables exclusively of this type .
The Bushong language recorded by Vansina , however , has final consonants , while slurring of the final syllable ( though written ) is reported as common among the Tonga of Malawi .
The morphological shape of Bantu words is typically CV , VCV , CVCV , VCVCV , etc. ; that is , any combination of CV ( with possibly a V - syllable at the start ) .
In other words , a strong claim for this language family is that almost all words end in a vowel , precisely because closed syllables ( CVC ) are not permissible in most of the documented languages , as far as is understood .
This tendency to avoid consonant clusters in some positions is important when words are imported from English or other non-Bantu languages .
An example from Chichewa : the word "school" , borrowed from English , and then transformed to fit the sound patterns of this language , is " sukulu" .
That is , "sk-" has been broken up by inserting an epenthetic "-u-" ; "-u" has also been added at the end of the word .
Similar effects are seen in loanwords for other non-African CV languages like Japanese .
However , a clustering of sounds at the beginning of a syllable can be readily observed in such languages as Shona , and the Makhuwa variants .
Reduplication is a common morphological phenomenon in Bantu languages and is usually used to indicate frequency or intensity of the action signalled by the (unreduplicated ) verb stem .
Well-known words and names that have reduplication include
Repetition emphasizes the repeated word in the context that it is used .
For instance , " Mwenda pole hajikwai , " while , " Pole pole ndio mwendo , " has two to emphasize the consistency of slowness of the pace .
The meaning of the former in translation is , " He who goes slowly does n't trip , " and that of the latter is , " A slow but steady pace wins the race . "
Haraka haraka would mean hurrying just for the sake of hurrying , reckless hurry , as in " Njoo!
On the contrary to the above definition , there are some words in some of the languages in which reduplication has the opposite meaning .
It usually denotes short durations , and or lower intensity of the action and also means a few repetitions or a little bit more .
Following are the principal Bantu languages of each country .
Included are those languages that constitute at least 1 % of the population and have at least 10 % the number of speakers of the largest Bantu language in the country .
Most languages are best known in English without the class prefix ( " Swahili" , " Tswana" , " Ndebele " ) , but are sometimes seen with the ( language-specific ) prefix ( "Kiswahili" , " Setswana" , " Sindebele " ) .
In a few cases prefixes are used to distinguish languages with the same root in their name , such as Tshiluba and Kiluba ( both " Luba" ) , Umbundu and Kimbundu ( both " Mbundu" ) .
The bare ( prefixless ) form typically does not occur in the language itself , but is the basis for other words based on the ethnicity .
So , in the country of Botswana the people are the " Batswana" , one person is a " Motswana" , and the language is " Setswana " ; and in Uganda , centred on the kingdom of " Buganda" , the dominant ethnicity are the " Baganda " (sg .
This list is incomplete ; an attempt at a full list of Bantu languages ( with various conflations and a puzzlingly diverse nomenclature ) was found in " The Bantu Languages of Africa " , 1959 .
Some words from various Bantu languages have been borrowed into western languages .
A case has been made out for borrowings of many place-names and even misremembered rhymes such as " Here we go looby-loo ... " – chiefly from one of the Luba varieties – in the USA .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Bodhidharma was a Buddhist monk who lived during the 5th or 6th century CE.
He is traditionally credited as the transmitter of Ch'an ( Sanskrit : " Dhyāna" , Korean : " Seon" , Japanese : " Zen " ) to China , and regarded as its first Chinese patriarch .
According to Chinese legend , he also began the physical training of the Shaolin monks that led to the creation of Shaolinquan .
Little contemporary biographical information on Bodhidharma is extant , and subsequent accounts became layered with legend .
The principal Chinese sources vary on their account of Bodhidharma 's origins .
Aside from the Chinese accounts , several popular traditions also exist regarding Bodhidharma 's origins .
The accounts also differ on the date of his arrival , with one early account claiming that he arrived during the Liú Sòng Dynasty ( 420–479 ) and later accounts dating his arrival to the Liáng Dynasty ( 502–557 ) .
Bodhidharma was primarily active in the lands of the Northern Wèi Dynasty ( 386–534) .
Modern scholarship dates him to about the early 5th century .
Several stories about Bodhidharma have become popular legends , which are still being used in the Ch'an and Zen tradition .
Bodhidharma 's teachings and practice centered on meditation and the Lankavatara Sutra .
The " Anthology of the Patriarchal Hall " ( 952 ) identifies Bodhidharma as the 28th Patriarch of Buddhism in an uninterrupted line that extends all the way back to the Buddha himself .
Throughout Buddhist art , Bodhidharma is depicted as a rather ill-tempered , profusely bearded and wide-eyed barbarian .
He is referred as " The Blue-Eyed Barbarian " ( 碧眼胡 ) in Chinese Chan texts .
There are two known extant accounts written by contemporaries of Bodhidharma .
Yáng Xuànzhī ( Yang Hsüan-chih ) - The Record of the Buddhist Monasteries of Luoyang .
The earliest text mentioned Bodhidharma is " The Record of the Buddhist Monasteries of Luoyang " ( 洛陽伽藍記 " Luòyáng Qiélánjì" ) which is compiled in 547 by Yáng Xuànzhī ( Yang-Hsuan-chih 楊衒之 ) , a writer and translator of Mahāyāna Buddhist texts into the Chinese language .
Tánlín - preface to the Two Entrances and Four Acts .
The second account was written by Tánlín ( 曇林 ; 506–574 ) .
Tánlín 's brief biography of the " Dharma Master " is found in his preface to the " Two Entrances and Four Acts " , a text traditionally attributed to Bodhidharma , and the first text to identify Bodhidharma as South Indian :
Tánlín 's account was the first to mention that Bodhidharma attracted disciples , specifically mentioning Dàoyù ( 道育 ) and Huìkě ( 慧可 ) , the latter of whom would later figure very prominently in the Bodhidharma literature .
Although Tánlín has traditionally been considered a disciple of Bodhidharma , it is more likely that he was a student of Huìkě .
Tanlin 's preface has also been preserved in Ching-chüeh 's ( 683-750 ) " Leng-ch'ieh shih-tzu chi" ( Chronicle of the Lankavatara Masters ) , which dates from 713-716./ca .
In the 7th-century historical work " Further Biographies of Eminent Monks " ( 續高僧傳 " Xù gāosēng zhuàn " ) , Dàoxuān ( 道宣 ; 596-667 ) possibly drew on Tanlin 's preface as a basic source , but made several significant additions :
Firstly , Dàoxuān adds more detail concerning Bodhidharma 's origins , writing that he was of " South Indian Brahman stock " ( 南天竺婆羅門種 " nán tiānzhú póluómén zhŏng " ) .
Secondly , more detail is provided concerning Bodhidharma 's journeys .
Tanlin 's original is imprecise about Bodhidharma 's travels , saying only that he " crossed distant mountains and seas " before arriving in Wei .
Dàoxuān 's account , however , implies " a specific itinerary " : " He first arrived at Nan-yüeh during the Sung period .
From there he turned north and came to the Kingdom of Wei" .
This implies that Bodhidharma had travelled to China by sea , and that he had crossed over the Yangtze River .
Thirdly , Dàoxuān suggests a date for Bodhidharma 's arrival in China .
He writes that Bodhidharma makes landfall in the time of the Song , thus making his arrival no later than the time of the Song 's fall to the Southern Qi Dynasty in 479 .
Bodhidharma , he writes , died at the banks of the Luo River , where he was interred by his disciple Huike , possibly in a cave .
According to Dàoxuān 's chronology , Bodhidharma 's death must have occurred prior to 534 , the date of the Northern Wei Dynasty 's fall , because Huike subsequently leaves Luoyang for Ye .
Furthermore , citing the shore of the Luo River as the place of death might possibly suggest that Bodhidharma died in the mass executions at Heyin 河陰 in 528 .
Supporting this possibility is a report in the " Taishō shinshū daizōkyō " stating that a Buddhist monk was among the victims at Héyīn .
In the " Anthology of the Patriarchal Hall " ( 祖堂集 " Zǔtángjí" ) of 952 , the elements of the traditional Bodhidharma story are in place .
Bodhidharma is said to have been a disciple of Prajñātāra , thus establishing the latter as the 27th patriarch in India .
After a three-year journey , Bodhidharma reached China in 527 during the Liang Dynasty ( as opposed to the Song period of the 5th century , as in Dàoxuān ) .
The " Anthology of the Patriarchal Hall " includes Bodhidharma 's encounter with Emperor Wu , which was first recorded around 758 in the appendix to a text by Shen-hui ( 神會 ) , a disciple of Huineng .
Finally , as opposed to Daoxuan 's figure of "over 150 years , " the " Anthology of the Patriarchal Hall " states that Bodhidharma died at the age of 150 .
He was then buried on Mount Xiong 'er ( 熊耳山 " Xióngĕr Shān " ) to the west of Luoyang .
However , three years after the burial , in the Pamir Mountains , Sòngyún ( 宋雲 )—an official of one of the later Wei kingdoms—encountered Bodhidharma , who claimed to be returning to India and was carrying a single sandal .
Bodhidharma predicted the death of Songyun 's ruler , a prediction which was borne out upon the latter 's return .
Bodhidharma 's tomb was then opened , and only a single sandal was found inside .
Insofar as , according to the " Anthology of the Patriarchal Hall" , Bodhidharma left the Liang court in 527 and relocated to Mount Song near Luoyang and the Shaolin Monastery , where he "faced a wall for nine years , not speaking for the entire time " , his date of death can have been no earlier than 536 .
Moreover , his encounter with the Wei official indicates a date of death no later than 554 , three years before the fall of the last Wei kingdom .
Subsequent to the " Anthology of the Patriarchal Hall" , the only dated addition to the biography of Bodhidharma is in the " Jingde Records of the Transmission of the Lamp " ( 景德傳燈錄 " Jĭngdé chuándēng lù" , published 1004 CE) , by Dàoyuán ( 道原 ) , in which it is stated that Bodhidharma 's original name had been Bodhitāra but was changed by his master Prajñātāra .
The same account is given by the Japanese master Keizan 's 13th century work of the same title .
Several contemporary popular traditions also exist regarding Bodhidharma 's origins .
An Indian tradition regards Bodhidharma to be the third son of a Tamil Pallava king from Kanchipuram .
This is consistent with the Southeast Asian traditions which also describe Bodhidharma as a former south Indian prince who had awakened his kundalini and mastered the martial arts .
The Tibetan version similarly characterises him as a dark-skinned Dravidian sage from south India .
Conversely , the Japanese tradition generally regards Bodhidharma to be from Persia .
Several stories about Bodhidharma have become popular legends , which are still being used in the Ch'an , Seon and Zen-tradition .
The " Anthology of the Patriarchal Hall " tells us that in 527 during the Liang Dynasty , Bodhidharma , the first Patriarch of Chán , visited the Emperor Wu ( Emperor Xiāo Yǎn 蕭衍 ( posthumous name Wǔdì 武帝 ) of Liáng 梁 China ) , a fervent patron of Buddhism :
Emperor Wu : " " How much karmic merit have I earned for ordaining Buddhist monks , building monasteries , having sutras copied , and commissioning Buddha images ? " "<br>
Good deeds done with worldly intent bring good karma , but no merit . " "<br>
Emperor Wu : " " So what is the highest meaning of noble truth ? " "<br>
Bodhidharma : " " There is no noble truth , there is only emptiness . " "<br>
Emperor Wu : " " Then , who is standing before me ? " "<br>
After Bodhidharma left , the Emperor asked the official in charge of the Imperial Annals about the encounter .
The Official of the Annals then asked the Emperor if he still denied knowing who Bodhidharma was .
When the Emperor said he did n't know , the Official said , " This was the Great-being Guanyin ( i .e . , the Mahasattva Avalokiteśvara ) transmitting the imprint of the Buddha 's Heart-Mind . "
The Emperor regretted his having let Bodhidharma leave and was going to dispatch a messenger to go and beg Bodhidharma to return .
The Official then said , " Your Highness , do not say to send out a messenger to go fetch him .
The people of the entire nation could go , and he still would not return . "
This encounter was included as the first kōan of the koan-collection " The Blue Cliff Record " .
Failing to make a favorable impression in Southern China , Bodhidharma is said to have travelled to the northern Chinese kingdom of Wei to the Shaolin Monastery .
After either being refused entry to the shaolin temple or being ejected after a short time , he lived in a nearby cave , where he "faced a wall for nine years , not speaking for the entire time " .
The biographical tradition is littered with apocryphal tales about Bodhidharma 's life and circumstances .
In one version of the story , he is said to have fallen asleep seven years into his nine years of wall-gazing .
Becoming angry with himself , he cut off his eyelids to prevent it from happening again .
According to the legend , as his eyelids hit the floor the first tea plants sprang up ; and thereafter tea would provide a stimulant to help keep students of Chán awake during meditation .
The most popular account relates that Bodhidharma was admitted into the Shaolin temple after nine years in the cave and taught there for some time .
However , other versions report that he "passed away , seated upright " ; or that he disappeared , leaving behind the " Yi Jin Jing " ; or that his legs atrophied after nine years of sitting , which is why Japanese Bodhidharma dolls have no legs .
In one legend , Bodhidharma refused to resume teaching until his would-be student , Dazu Huike , who had kept vigil for weeks in the deep snow outside of the monastery , cut off his own left arm to demonstrate sincerity .
Legend has it that Bodhidharma wished to return to India and called together his disciples and the following exchange took place :
Bodhidharma passed on the symbolic robe and bowl of dharma succession to Huike and , some texts claim , a copy of the Lankavatara Sutra .
Bodhidharma then either returned to India or died .
Some Chinese accounts describe Bodhidharma as being disturbed by the poor physical shape of the Shaolin monks , after which he instructed them in techniques to maintain their physical condition as well as teaching meditation .
He is said to have taught a series of external exercises called the Eighteen Arhat Hands ( " Shi-ba Lohan Shou" ) , and an internal practice called the Sinew Metamorphosis Classic .
In addition , after his departure from the temple , two manuscripts by Bodhidharma were said to be discovered inside the temple : the Yijin Jing ( 易筋經 or " Muscle/Tendon Change Classic" ) and the Xi Sui Jing .
Copies and translations of the Yi Jin Jing survive to the modern day .
According to Southeast Asian folklore , Bodhidharma travelled from Jambudvipa by sea to Palembang , Indonesia .
Passing through Sumatra , Java , Bali , Malaysia and Thailand , he eventually entered China from the Southeast Asian mainland .
In his travels through the region , Bodhidharma is said to have transmitted his knowledge of the Mahayana doctrine and the martial arts .
Malay legend holds that he introduced forms to silat .
Vajrayana tradition links Bodhidharma with the 11th-century Dravidian monk Phadampa Sangye who travelled extensively to Tibet and China spreading tantric teachings .
Three years after Bodhidharma 's death , Ambassador Sòngyún of northern Wei is said to have seen him walking while holding a shoe at the Pamir Heights .
Sòngyún asked Bodhidharma where he was going , to which Bodhidharma replied " I am going home " .
When asked why he was holding his shoe , Bodhidharma answered " You will know when you reach Shaolin monastery .
Do n't mention that you saw me or you will meet with disaster " .
After arriving at the palace , Sòngyún told the emperor that he met Bodhidharma on the way .
The emperor said Bodhidharma was already dead and buried , and had Sòngyún arrested for lying .
At the Shaolin Temple , the monks informed them that Bodhidharma was dead and had been buried in a hill behind the temple .
The grave was exhumed and was found to contain a single shoe .
The monks then said " Master has gone back home " and prostrated three times :
Bodhidharma is traditionally seen as introducing dhyana-practice in China .
One of the fundamental Chán texts attributed to Bodhidharma is a four-line stanza whose first two verses echo the " Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra " 's disdain for words and whose second two verses stress the importance of the insight into reality achieved through " self-realization " :
It lets one see into own true nature and attain Buddhahood . " "
The stanza , in fact , is not Bodhidharma 's , but rather dates to the year 1108 .
Tanlin , in the preface to " Two Entrances and Four Acts " , and Daoxuan , in the " Further Biographies of Eminent Monks " , mention a practice of Bodhidharma 's termed "wall-gazing " ( 壁觀 " bìguān " ) .
Both Tanlin and Daoxuan associate this "wall-gazing " with "quieting mind " ( 安心 " ān xīn " ) .
In the " Two Entrances and Four Acts " , traditionally attributed to Bodhidharma , the term "wall-gazing " is given as follows :
Daoxuan states : " " The merits of Mahāyāna wall-gazing are the highest " " .
These are the first mentions in the historical record of what may be a type of meditation being ascribed to Bodhidharma .
Exactly what sort of practice Bodhidharma 's "wall-gazing " was remains uncertain .
Nearly all accounts have treated it either as an undefined variety of meditation , as Daoxuan and Dumoulin , or as a variety of seated meditation akin to the zazen ( 坐禪 ; Chinese : "zuòchán " ) that later became a defining characteristic of Chán .
The latter interpretation is particularly common among those working from a Ch'an standpoint .
There have also , however , been interpretations of "wall-gazing " as a non-meditative phenomenon .
There are early texts which explicitly associate Bodhidharma with the " Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra" .
Daoxuan , for example , in a late recension of his biography of Bodhidharma 's successor Huike , has the sūtra as a basic and important element of the teachings passed down by Bodhidharma :
Another early text , the " Record of the Masters and Disciples of the Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra " ( 楞伽師資記 " Léngqié shīzī jì" ) of Jìngjué ( 淨覺 ; 683–750 ) , also mentions Bodhidharma in relation to this text .
Jingjue 's account also makes explicit mention of " sitting meditation" , or zazen :
In other early texts , the school that would later become known as C'an is sometimes referred to as the " Laṅkāvatāra school " ( 楞伽宗 " Léngqié zōng " ) .
The " Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra" , one of the Mahāyāna Buddhist sūtras , is a highly "difficult and obscure " text whose basic thrust is to emphasize " the inner enlightenment that does away with all duality and is raised above all distinctions " .
It is among the first and most important texts in the Yogācāra , or " Consciousness-only" , school of Mahāyāna Buddhism .
One of the recurrent emphases in the " Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra " is a lack of reliance on words to effectively express reality :
In contrast to the ineffectiveness of words , the sūtra instead stresses the importance of the " self-realization " that is "attained by noble wisdom " and occurs " when one has an insight into reality as it is " : " The truth is the state of self-realization and is beyond categories of discrimination " .
The sūtra goes on to outline the ultimate effects of an experience of self-realization :
The idea of a patriarchal lineage in Ch'an dates back to the epitaph for Fărú ( 法如 638–689 ) , a disciple of the 5th patriarch Hóngrĕn ( 弘忍 601–674 ) .
In the Two Entrances and Four Acts and the " Continued Biographies of Eminent Monks " , Daoyu and Huike are the only explicitly identified disciples of Bodhidharma .
The epitaph gives a line of descent identifying Bodhidharma as the first patriarch .
In the 6th century biographies of famous monks were collected .
From this genre the typical Ch'an-lineage was developed :
D.T. Suzuki contends that Ch'an 's growth in popularity during the 7th and 8th centuries attracted criticism that it had " no authorized records of its direct transmission from the founder of Buddhism " and that Ch'an historians made Bodhidharma the 28th patriarch of Buddhism in response to such attacks .
The earliest lineages described the lineage from Bodhidharma into the 5th to 7th generation of patriarchs .
Various records of different authors are known , which give a variation of transmission lines :
Eventually these descriptions of the lineage evolved into a continuous lineage from Śākyamuni Buddha to Bodhidharma .
The idea of a line of descent from Śākyamuni Buddha is the basis for the distinctive lineage tradition of the Chán school .
According to the " Song of Enlightenment " ( 證道歌 " Zhèngdào gē" ) by Yǒngjiā Xuánjué ( 665-713 ) , one of the chief disciples of Huìnéng , was Bodhidharma the 28th Patriarch of Buddhism in a line of descent from Śākyamuni Buddha via his disciple Mahākāśyapa :
The " Transmission of the Light " gives 28 patriarchs in this transmission :
Bodhidharma has been the subject of critical scientific research , which has shed new light on the traditional stories about Bodhidharma .
According to John McRae , Bodhidharma has been the subject of a hagiographic process which served the needs of the Chinese Ch'an movement .
According to him it is not possible to write an accurate biography of Bodhidharma :
" " Yanagida ascribes great historical value to the witness of the disciple T'an-lin , but at the same time acknowledges the presence of "many puzzles in the biography of Bodhidharma" .
Given the present state of the sources , he considers it impossible to compile a reliable account of Bodhidharma 's life " .
Several scholars have suggested that the composed image of Bodhidharma depended on the combination of supposed historical information on various historical figures over several centuries .
Bodhidharma as a historical person may even never have actually existed .
The Persian heritage is doubtful , according to Dumoulin :
" " In the description of the Lo-yang temple , bodhidharma is called a Persian .
Given the ambiguity of geographical references in writings of this period , such a statement should not be taken too seriously . "
Dumoulin considers Tan-lin 's account of Bodhidharma being " the third son of a great Brahman king " to be a later addition , and finds the exact meaning of " South Indian Brahman stock " unclear :
" " And when Tao-hsuan speaks of origins from South Indian Brahman stock , it is not clear whether he is referring to roots in nobility or to India in general as the land of the Brahmans . " "
These Chinese sources lend themselves to make inferences about Bodhidharma 's origins .
" The third son of a Brahman king " has been speculated to mean " the third son of a Pallavine king" .
Based on a specific pronunciation of the Chinese characters 香至 as Kang-zhi , "meaning fragrance extreme" , Tsutomu Kambe identifies 香至 to be Kanchipuram , an old capital town in the state Tamil-Nadu .
" "Kanchi means 'a radiant jewel ' or 'a luxury belt with jewels' , and puram means a town or a state in the sense of earlier times .
Thus , it is understood that the '香至-Kingdom ' corresponds to the old capital 'Kanchipuram ' . " "
In the context of the Indian caste system the mention of " Brahman king " acquires a nuance .
Broughton notes that "king " implies that Bodhidharma was of a member of the Kshatriya caste of warriors and rulers .
Brahman is , in western contexts , easily understood as Brahmana or Brahmin , which means "priest " .
According to tradition Bodhidharma was given this name by his teacher known variously as Panyatara , Prajnatara , or Prajñādhara .
His name prior to monkhood is said to be Jayavarman .
Bodhidharma is associated with several other names , and is also known by the name Bodhitara .
Tibetan sources give his name as " Bodhidharmottāra " or " Dharmottara" , that is , " Highest teaching ( dharma ) of enlightenment " .
Buswell dates Bodhidharma abode in China approximately at the early 5th century .
Broughton dates Bodhidharma 's presence in Luoyang to between 516 and 526 , when the temple referred to—Yǒngníngs ì ( 永寧寺 ) , was at the height of its glory .
Starting in 526 , Yǒngníngs ì suffered damage from a series of events , ultimately leading to its destruction in 534 .
Traditionally Bodhidharma is credited as founder of the martial arts at the Shaolin Temple .
However , martial arts historians have shown this legend stems from a 17th-century qigong manual known as the " Yijin Jing" .
The authenticity of the " Yi Jin Jing " has been discredited by some historians including Tang Hao , Xu Zhen and Matsuda Ryuchi .
This argument is summarized by modern historian Lin Boyuan in his " Zhongguo wushu shi" :
The oldest available copy was published in 1827 .
The composition of the text itself has been dated to 1624 .
Even then , the association of Bodhidharma with martial arts only became widespread as a result of the 1904–1907 serialization of the novel " The Travels of Lao Ts'an " in " Illustrated Fiction Magazine " :
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
The British National Party ( BNP ) is a far-right political party in the United Kingdom .
The party was formed by John Tyndall in 1982 from the merging of several political parties , and since 1999 has been led by Nick Griffin .
It advocates "voluntary resettlement whereby immigrants and their descendants are afforded the opportunity to return to their lands of ethnic origin . "
As well as anti-immigration policies , the party advocates the reintroduction of capital punishment and opposes same-sex marriage , multiculturalism and what it perceives as the Islamification of the UK.
The party 's ideology has been described as fascist or neo-fascist by political scientists and commentators , though the party denies this .
High-profile groups and people including The Royal British Legion and David Cameron have criticised the BNP , and BNP membership is prohibited for people of certain occupations .
It restricted membership to "indigenous British " people until a 2010 legal challenge to its constitution .
An electoral breakthrough in 2008-2009 led to the BNP holding over fifty local council seats , forming the official opposition on Barking and Dagenham Council , winning a seat in the London Assembly and having leader Nick Griffin and Andrew Brons elected as Members of the European Parliament ( MEP ) in the North West and Yorkshire and Humber regions respectively .
After failing to secure a seat at the 2010 General Election , the BNP has declined in membership and a number of breakaway groups have been formed .
In 2014 , Griffin lost his MEP seat and the party all but two of its councillors .
The British National Party was founded in 1982 following a split within the far right National Front ( NF ) two years before .
After a poor showing at the 1979 general election , internal factional division heightened within the NF , culminating in chairman John Tyndall leaving the party in 1980 , and founding the New National Front , which became the BNP two years later .
The formation of the BNP absorbed the membership of the British Democratic Party , Constitutional Movement and several members of the disintegrating British Movement were allowed to join .
In 1983 , Tyndall sought to make an electoral impact by fielding 53 candidates in the 1983 general election , which guaranteed a free party broadcast , but all of the BNP 's candidates combined—including Tyndall and his wife Valerie—achieved only 14,621 votes and as a result they lost all of their deposits .
Tyndall claimed that the party attracted 3,000 enquiries for membership after the 1983 general election .
However , despite an increase in media exposure , the BNP continued to poll very low in council elections .
In 1986 , Tyndall and John Morse were imprisoned for inciting racial hatred .
The party almost ceased its electoral activity in the late 1980s .
The decline of the National Front during the early 1990s caused an increase in support and membership for the BNP.
In 1993 , Derek Beackon won the BNP 's first council seat in Millwall , Tower Hamlets with 1480 votes ( 33.9 % ) , beating the Labour Party .
However Beackon lost his seat the following year .
After the 1997 general election , the BNP once again suffered a setback .
At local elections in May 1998 , the BNP fielded five more candidates than in 1994 but its average vote fell from just over 13 % to 3.28 % .
In Tower Hamlets , where it once had considerable support boosted by Beackon 's Millwall victory , its average share of the poll slumped by almost half .
In October 1999 , Nick Griffin stood against Tyndall for leadership of the party .
After Griffin won he began modernizing the BNP 's image by removing what he perceived as " careless extremist " elements and undertaking an "ideological revamp " for the next general election , spurred on in part , by the electoral gains achieved by Jean-Marie Le Pen 's Front National of France , and Jörg Haider 's Freedom Party of Austria .
Griffin founded a new monthly newspaper , " The Voice of Freedom" , and a journal , " Identity" .
During the 2001 local elections , the BNP secured three seats on Burnley Council .
At local level , the BNP continued to improve on its electoral results in 2002–03 , gaining council seats in Blackburn , Calderdale and five more councillors in Burnley despite an extensive opposition campaign .
This success led to a large number of the National Democrats party members , including Simon Darby and Martin Wingfield , defecting to the British National Party from 1999 to 2003 .
After the 2004 elections , the BBC and " Searchlight " created a documentary called " The Secret Agent" , featuring Jason Gwynne infiltrating the BNP.
In it , Griffin and Mark Collett made comments critical of Islam .
Following the documentary , Barclays Bank froze the party 's accounts .
Collett and Griffin were acquitted on charges of incitement to racial hatred in 2006 .
Following the 7 July 2005 London bombings , the BNP released fliers with the slogan , " Maybe now it 's time to start listening to the BNP . "
Griffin claimed that this was the " cost of voting Labour" , attacking the government for bringing the United Kingdom into an "illegal " Iraq War and for its immigration policies .
Large gains were made in the 2006 local elections , where the BNP more than doubled its number of councillors and became the second party on the Barking and Dagenham council .
The BNP was investigated by the Electoral Commission in 2007 , after " The Guardian " revealed that it had set up a front organisation to raise money from sympathisers in the United States .
In 2008 , Richard Barnbrook secured a seat for the BNP on the London Assembly after getting 5.3 % ( 130,714 votes ) .
In the following 2009 European elections the British National Party won two seats in the European Parliament .
Griffin stated that it was " a great victory , we go on from here . "
Meanwhile , the Labour and Conservative parties both referred to it as a " sad moment " .
In local elections held the same day , the BNP also won its first three county council seats in Lancashire , Leicestershire and Hertfordshire .
The electoral breakthrough of the British National Party was widely reported throughout Britain by the mainstream media at the time .
Matthew Goodwin in his article " The BNP 's breakthrough " notes that the British National Party was able to capitalise on widespread public anxiety over immigration .
Also in light of the expenses scandal , there was media speculation that the BNP could do well in the polls ( having also campaigned on a " Punish the Pigs " anti-expense platform ) as voters sought an alternative party to register their protest .
In October 2009 , Nick Griffin appeared on the BBC 's " Question Time" , amid significant public controversy .
The BBC received 243 complaints of bias against Griffin , and 116 for allowing him to appear at all .
The British National Party in the 2010 general election fielded a record 338 candidates , polling 563,743 votes , but won no seats .
Nick Griffin came third in the Barking constituency , where the party the same year in the local elections lost all of its 12 councillors it held on the borough .
In aftermath of the elections , the party suffered from infighting over concerns regarding finances and Griffin 's leadership .
This led to a breakaway group called the British Freedom Party .
However the BFP later de-registered as a political party .
Griffin secured a narrow victory , beating Brons by nine votes of a total of 2,316 votes cast .
In October 2012 , Brons left the party , leaving Griffin as its sole MEP.
In the 2012 and 2013 local elections , the BNP won no council seats and witnessed a large drop in terms of their average vote .
In June 2013 , Griffin visited Syria on a "peace mission " along with members of Jobbik to meet with the Speaker of the Syrian People 's Assembly , Mohammad Jihad al-Laham , the Prime Minister Wael Nader al-Halqi , among other government officials .
Griffin claims he was influential in the speaker of Syria 's Parliament writing an open letter to British MPs urging them to "turn Great Britain from the warpath " by not intervening in the Syrian conflict .
Nick Griffin lost his European Parliament seat in the 2014 European election .
Party literature published by the BNP commonly cites the fact that Britain is the second most densely populated country in Europe , and that White British as an ethnic group are a minority demographically in London , Leicester and Luton .
The BNP argue that these areas in England have been "ethnically cleansed " and that " to ensure that we do not become a minority in our own homeland ... we call for an immediate halt to all further immigration " .
The party allows for what it calls "exceptional immigration" , but only on an extremely limited basis .
For example Nick Griffin has argued that : " If you are talking about Polish plumbers or Afghan refugees , the doors are going to be shut , because Britain is full " but that if Britain needed a physicist , say from Japan , " to help with the UK 's nuclear programme " the party would make an exception on an individual level .
The BNP 's policy on illegal immigrants is to deport them , while closing the doors to asylum seekers which they regard as "bogus " since : "international law provides that such persons must be given – and must seek – refuge in the nearest safe country .
So , unless a flood of refugees from a civil war in France or Denmark shows up on our shores , these refugees are simply not Britain’s responsibility and have no right to refuge here " .
In regards to legal immigrants settled in UK, the BNP "recognises the right of legally settled and law-abiding minorities to remain in the UK and enjoy the full protection of the law , on the understanding that the indigenous population of Britain has the right to remain the majority population of our nation " .
It offers however voluntary repatriation where "generous grants to those of foreign descent resident here who wish to leave permanently " .
The BNP maintains a policy of protectionism and economic nationalism , although in comparison with other far-right nationalist parties , the BNP focuses less on corporatism .
The party wish to move towards a greater national self-sufficiency and demands an immediate withdrawal from the European Union .
It has advocated ending overseas aid to provide economic support within the UK and to finance the voluntary repatriation of legal immigrants .
It has called for British ownership of its own industries and resources and the " subordination of the power of the City to the power of the government " .
It has promoted the regeneration of farming in the United Kingdom , with the object of achieving maximum self-sufficiency in food production .
In 2002 , the party criticised corporatism as a "mixture of big capitalism and state control" , saying it favoured a "distributionist tradition established by home-grown thinkers " favouring small business .
In its 2005 and 2010 manifesto , the BNP opposed "globalism , international socialism , laissez-faire capitalism and economic liberalism" .
The BNP rejects the notion of Thatcherism and " submitting to the dictates of the international marketplace " which "has no loyalty to this country " .
The BNP has claimed that it is possible for a national economy to thrive outside of the laissez-faire model , pointing to 21st century examples such as Japan , South Korea and Singapore .
The BNP claims that , while immigration increases the aggregate GNP by providing cheap labour , it decreases the per-capita GNP , which the BNP claims is most representative of the economic well-being of British people .
The party advocates capital punishment for "drug dealers , child murderers , multiple murderers , murderers of policemen on duty and terrorists where guilt is proven beyond all doubt " .
Other key BNP declarations on crime include : "abolishing political correctness from the police service in favour of real crime fighting " and to "establish a penal station for hardened and repeat criminals on the British island of South Georgia" .
The party is opposed to new mosques being built in UK, as well as halal and kosher ritual slaughter .
Nick Griffin has worked with extremists from Sikh and Hindu communities in Britain on anti-Muslim campaigns .
The BNP is opposed to same sex marriage and proposes that homosexuality should be returned " to the closet " .
It claims to support traditional family values and encourage the teaching of British folk traditions .
BNP policy pledges to protect freedom of speech , while repealing the 1998 Human Rights Act and withdraw from the European Convention on Human Rights .
The party website calls to ban " ID cards , intrusive surveillance and the retention of DNA samples of the innocent " .
The BNP says it is " committed to a free , fully funded National Health Service for all British citizens " .
A further BNP policy is " to end the conflict in Ireland by welcoming Eire as well as Ulster as equal partners in a federation of the nations of the British Isles " .
The British National Party claimed in its 2005 manifesto to be the "only true ‘Green Party ’ " in Britain since :
The British National Party since its foundation has been described as fascist by political scholars , tabloid newspapers , the BBC and leading politicians including David Cameron .
Nick Griffin however claims that his modernization of the party removed "extremist " elements .
Further , Griffin argues that while Tyndall 's BNP had it ideological roots "in the sub-Mosleyite wackiness of Arnold Leese 's Imperial Fascist League " there is " a huge gulf between this totalitarian approach and the modernist approach of the new BNP " which rejects fascism .
According to political scholars who have analyzed the BNP 's 2005 and 2010 general election manifesto , the party signifies a "fascism recalibration " rather than a break with it , despite Griffin introducing right wing populism .
It is argued that the BNP attempts to hide its fascist politics to attract popular support .
The BNP continues to deny that it is fascist and claims that such accusations are " a smear that comes from the far left " to discourage people from voting BNP.
Under the leadership of John Tyndall , the party was openly racist .
Griffin in 2001 denounced the parties former views on race arguing that : " The BNP is no longer a genuine white racial nationalist party " calling the party 's new ideology "ethno-nationalism " based on " concern for the well-being of the English , Scottish , Welsh and Irish ethnic nations that compose the United Kingdom " and that "unlike racial nationalist purists , we would be opposed to the arrival at Dover of several million German or Swedish immigrants " .
According to Matthew Goodwin : " Ideologically , Grifﬁn’s BNP has modiﬁed its exoteric appeals , moderating its discourse on race and immigration , and adopting more voter-friendly themes such as ‘Democracy’ ,‘Identity’ ,‘Freedom’ and ‘Security ' .
Under Grifﬁn , the party now downplay the crude anti-black racism and conspiratorial anti-Semitism that characterized its predecessors in favor of ‘differentialist racism ’ based on the ethno-pluralist doctrine , stating for example : ‘The BNP does not claim that any one race is superior to any other , simply that they are different . "
Another study points out that under Griffin 's modernization of the party : " Although race still figures , it does so less prominently and it no longer forms the premise of their nationalist agenda which gradually and increasingly comprises of civic values such as liberal sovereignty and the rule of law . "
Speaking on the BBC 's " Andrew Marr Show " in 2009 , Nick Griffin declared that , unlike Tyndall , he "does not want all-white UK" because "nobody out there wants it or would pay for it " .
The party is still accused of racism since it only regards people of White British ethnicity to be British :
In 2010 , following legal action by the Equality and Human Rights Commission , the party changed its constitution which had restricted membership to "indigenous British " people .
When the party changed its constitution on membership which allowed ethnic minorities to join , a 78-year-old Sikh , Rajinder Singh , became the first Asian member .
The party accepts mixed-race relationships , but argues they are not normal .
The BNP supported controversial University of Leeds lecturer Dr Frank Ellis , who was suspended after stating that the Bell Curve theory "has demonstrated to me beyond any reasonable doubt there is a persistent gap in average black and white average intelligence " .
On 17 May 2009 , " The Daily Telegraph " wrote that the BNP 's leader , Nick Griffin , had branded Lance Corporal Johnson Beharry , a black recipient of the Victoria Cross , an "immigrant " whose bravery was simply "routine " .
The " Telegraph " quoted the BNP website as calling Beharry 's award of the Victoria Cross "positive discrimination by the PC-mad government " .
Beharry was awarded the Victoria Cross in 2005 for action in Iraq , when he returned to his burning armoured personnel carrier three times , under sustained enemy fire , to lift his wounded comrades from the vehicle .
The BNP claimed : " All he did was drive away very fast from a combat zone . "
The party states that it "has moved on in recent years , casting off the leg-irons of conspiracy theories and the thinly veiled anti-semitism which has held this party back for two decades .
The real enemies of the British people are home grown Anglo-Saxon Celtic liberal-leftists ... and the Crescent Horde—the endless wave of Islamics who are flocking to our shores to bring our island nations into the embrace of their barbaric desert religion " .
Consequently , the party has shifted allegiance in conflicts involving Israel .
In 2009 , Griffin stated : " I have brought the British National party from the frankly an anti-semitic and racist organisation , into the only party which in the clashes between Israel and Gaza supported Israel 's right to deal with Hamas terrorists . "
Griffin has said that this shift in emphasis is designed to increase the party 's appeal : " We should be positioning ourselves to take advantage for our own political ends of the growing wave of public hostility to Islam currently being whipped up by the mass media" .
The party summarised its position on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict by stating that " the BNP supports the right of Israel to be Jewish .
This ethno-nationalist concept is at the heart of the party 's desire to keep Britain British .
The BNP also supports the rights of the Palestinians to their own state , and argues that a two-state solution is the only obvious , fair and reasonable solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict . "
The BNP has more recently expressed views that could be construed as critical of Israel , which some have interpreted as an abandonment of the party 's move towards moderation .
In April 2013 , the BNP declared that it believes Israel to be " an aggressive military power that treats the Palestinians as less than human " and expressed the view that Palestinians are "prisoners in their own country " and " strangers in their own land " .
The BNP is opposed to same sex marriage and wishes to ban what it perceives as the promotion of homosexuality in schools and the media .
It proposes that homosexuality should be returned " to the closet " .
BNP spokesman Phil Edwards stated that homosexuality "is unnatural " and "does not lead to procreation but does lead to moral turpitude and disease " .
In 2009 Nick Griffin said that : " a lot of people find the sight of two grown men kissing in public really creepy .
I understand that homosexuals do n't understand that but that 's how a lot of us feel . "
It has been claimed that the BNP is opposed to allowing British Army Gurkhas the right of settlement in the United Kingdom .
In 2009 , Nick Griffin said : " We do n't think the most overcrowded country in Europe , can realistically say , ' Look , you can all come and all your relatives '... When the Gurkhas signed up—frankly as mercenaries—they expected a pension which would allow them to live well in their own country " .
Later , he said that if he could swap " 100,000 members of the Muslim community , who say that they support al Qaeda " for the Gurkhas it "would be a good exchange " .
Nick Griffin has described the commentary about his party 's policies on the Gurkhas as "lies " , stating the party has "never before even debated this issue " .
He added , " ... A BNP government would look far more sympathetically on the plight of the Gurkhas than the current Labour government . "
The chairman of the BNP has final say in all policy matters .
15 further members of the party leadership have responsibility for various areas of its operations .
These executive positions work alongside an Advisory Council , the party 's senior policy body , which meets at least three times a year .
Its role is to "inspect the party 's accounts , ensuring proper conduct of the party 's finances , and to act as a forum for the party 's leadership to discuss vital issues and carve out the party 's agenda" .
The party is organised into 12 regions , based upon the UK European Parliament constituencies , each with an organiser .
The party organises four groups that deal with specific areas of activity—Land and People ( rural affairs ) , Pensioners ' Awareness Group , the Friends of European Nationalism ( a New Zealand-based organisation ) and the Ethnic Liaison Committee , which co-ordinates work with non-whites .
The BNP has contested seats in England , Wales , Scotland and Northern Ireland .
Research from Robert Ford and Matthew Goodwin shows that BNP support is concentrated among older and less educated working-class men living in the declining industrial towns of the North and Midlands regions , in contrast to previous significant far-right parties like the National Front , which drew support from a younger demographic .
The British National Party has contested general elections since 1983 .
The BNP in the 2001 general election saved 5 deposits ( out of 33 contested seats ) and secured its best general election result in Oldham West and Royton ( which had recently been the scene of racially motivated rioting between white and Asian youths ) where party leader Nick Griffin secured 16 % of the vote .
The 2005 general election was considered a major breakthrough by the BNP , as they picked up 192,746 votes in the 119 constituencies it contested , took a 0.7 % share of the overall vote , and retained a deposit in 40 of the seats .
The BNP put forward candidates for 338 out of 650 seats for the 2010 general election gaining 563,743 votes ( 1.9 % ) , finishing in fifth place and failing to win any seats .
However , a record of 73 deposits were saved .
Party chairman Griffin came third in the Barking constituency , behind Margaret Hodge of Labour and Simon Marcus of the Conservatives , who were first and second respectively .
At 14.6 % , this was the BNP 's best result in any of the seats it contested that year .
The BNP 's first electoral success came in 1993 , when Derek Beackon was returned as a councillor in Millwall , London .
He lost his seat in elections the following year .
The next BNP success in local elections was not until the 2002 local elections , when three BNP candidates gained seats on Burnley council .
The party had 55 councillors for a time in 2009 .
After the 2013 local county council elections , the BNP was left with a total of two borough councillors in England :
BNP lead candidate Richard Barnbrook won a seat in the London Assembly in May 2008 , after the party gained 5.3 % of the London-wide vote .
However , in August 2010 , he resigned the party whip and became an independent .
The BNP has taken part in European Parliament elections since 1999 , when they received 1.13 % of the total vote ( 102,647 votes ) .
In the 2004 elections to the European Parliament , the BNP won 4.9 % of the vote , making it the sixth biggest party overall , but did not win any seats .
The BNP won two seats in the European Parliament in the 2009 elections .
Andrew Brons was elected in the Yorkshire and the Humber regional constituency with 9.8 % of the vote .
Party chairman Nick Griffin was elected in the North West region , with 8 % of the vote .
In the 2007 Welsh Assembly elections , the BNP fielded 20 candidates , four in each of the five regional lists , with Nick Griffin standing in the South Wales West region .
It did not win any seats , but was the only minor party to have saved deposits in the electoral regions , one in the North Wales region and the other in the South Wales West region .
In total the BNP polled 42,197 votes ( 4.3 % ) .
In the 2011 Welsh Assembly elections , the BNP fielded 20 candidates , four in each of the five regional lists and for the first time 7 candidates were fielded in FPTP constituencies .
On the regional lists , the BNP polled 22,610 votes ( 2.4 % ) , down 1.9 % from 2007 .
In 2 out of the 7 FPTP constituencies contested the BNP saved desposits : ( Swansea East and Islwyn ) .
In the 2007 Scottish Parliament election , the party fielded 32 candidates , entitling it to public funding and an election broadcast , prompting criticism .
The BNP received 24,616 votes ( 1.2 % ) , no seats were won , nor were any deposits saved .
In the 2011 Scottish Parliament election , the BNP fielded 32 candidates in the regional lists .
The BNP fielded 3 candidates for the first time in three constituencies each in the 2011 Northern Ireland Legislative Assembly elections ( Belfast East , East Antrim and South Antrim ) .
1,252 votes were polled ( 0.2 % ) , winning no seats for the party .
The BNP says that National Union of Journalists guidelines on reporting 'far right ' organisations forbid unionised journalists from reporting uncritically on the party .
In April 2007 , an election broadcast was cancelled by BBC Radio Wales whose lawyers believed that the broadcast was defamatory of the Chief Constable of North Wales Police , Richard Brunstrom .
The BNP claimed that BBC editors were following an agenda .
In " ASLEF v. United Kingdom" , the European Court of Human Rights overturned an employment appeal tribunal ruling that awarded BNP member and train driver Jay Lee damages for expulsion from a trade union .
It found that the union was entitled to decide who could be a member , and that the UK was in breach of the European Convention on Human Rights in the way it had treated ASLEF.
Arthur Redfearn was a bus driver whose BNP membership was unknown to his employer , Serco , until he was elected as a councillor .
His employer was concerned that he might endanger its contract with a local council to transport vulnerable people of various ethnicities from a day centre and he was dismissed .
The Employment Tribunal held that members of racist organisations could lawfully be dismissed on health and safety grounds if there was a danger of violence occurring in the workplace .
In November 2012 , the European Court of Human Rights made a majority ruling ( 4 to 3 ) that in Redfearn 's case against the UK government , his rights under Article 11 ( free association ) had been infringed , but not those under Article 10 ( free expression ) or Article 14 ( discrimination ) .
Several organisations prohibit their staff from being members of the BNP.
Membership of the BNP , Combat 18 and the National Front by police officers and staff was prohibited by then Home Secretary David Blunkett , following an undercover TV exposure of racism in a police training centre .
The Association of Chief Police Officers banned serving police officers joining the BNP in 2004 .
Greater Manchester Police ( GMP ) referred to the Independent Police Complaints Commission allegations that GMP employees participated in a BNP rally .
After BNP membership lists were leaked on the Internet , a number of police forces investigated officers whose names appeared on the lists .
A ban on BNP membership for prison workers was imposed by Martin Narey , Director of the Prison Service , in 2002 .
Narey told the BBC that he received hate mail and a death threat as a result .
In February 2009 , the General Synod of the Church of England voted to ban its clergy from joining the BNP.
In 2010 Education Secretary Michael Gove pledged to allow head teachers to dismiss employees who are members of the BNP , saying that " I do n't believe that membership of the BNP is compatible with being a teacher ... allow headteachers and governing bodies the powers and confidence to be able to dismiss teachers engaging in extremist activity . "
John Hagan claims that the BNP has conducted right-wing extremist violence to gain "institutionalized power " .
Critics of the BNP , such as Human Rights Watch in a 1997 report , have asserted that the party recruits from skinhead groups and that it promotes racist violence .
In the past , Nick Griffin has defended the threat of violence to further the party 's aims .
In 1986 , when Griffin was Deputy Chairman of the NF , he advised his audience at an anti-IRA rally to use the " traditional British methods of the brick , the boot and the fist . "
After the BNP won its first council seat in 1993 , he wrote that the BNP should not be a "postmodernist rightist party " but " a strong , disciplined organisation with the ability to back up its slogan ' Defend Rights for Whites ' with well-directed boots and fists .
When the crunch comes , power is the product of force and will , not of rational debate " .
In 1997 he said : " It is more important to control the streets of a city than its council chambers . "
A BBC " Panorama " programme reported on a number of BNP members who have had criminal convictions , some racially motivated .
Tony Lecomber was imprisoned for three years for possessing explosives , after a nail bomb exploded while he was carrying it to the offices of the Workers ' Revolutionary Party in 1985 .
He was imprisoned for three years in 1991 whilst serving as the BNP 's Director of Propaganda for assaulting a Jewish teacher .
In 2007 , Robert Cottage , a former BNP council candidate , was sentenced to two and a half years for possession of explosives but a conspiracy charge against him was withdrawn after two juries had been unable to reach a verdict .
The prosecution claimed that Cottage had plans to assassinate Tony Blair and Liberal Democrat peer Lord Greaves .
The chemicals recovered by police are believed to be the largest explosives haul ever found at a house in Britain .
On 18 November 2008 , a list of over 10,000 BNP members was published by Wikileaks in breach of a court injunction .
This included names , addresses and other personal details .
People on the list included prison officers ( barred from BNP membership ) , teachers , soldiers , civil servants and members of the clergy .
Nick Griffin claimed that any party member dismissed from employment would be able to receive substantial compensation .
The BNP advised those named on the list to deny their membership and said that they would confirm that in writing if required .
The BNP claimed it contained the names of persons who had never been members of the BNP.
The BNP 's Lee Barnes claimed that the list was false .
People affected by the disclosure included a DJ, Rod Lucas , who was dropped by the Talksport radio station .
He said : " I am an investigative radio journalist and am a member of over 20 political parties and pressure groups ...
It does n't necessarily mean I agree with their views . "
A drama teacher at a prep school whose name was found on the list had been dismissed from a previous position as a result of her BNP membership .
Following an investigation by Welsh police and the Information Commissioner 's Office , two people were arrested in December 2008 for breach of the Data Protection Act concerning the leak .
Matthew Single was subsequently found guilty and fined £200 .
The fine was criticised as an " an absolute disgrace " by a BNP spokesman and a detective sergeant involved said he was "disappointed " with the outcome .
The Equality and Human Rights Commission sent the BNP a letter in 2009 , ahead of legal action , setting out concerns about the BNP 's constitution and membership criteria .
It alleged that the BNP 's constitution restricting membership to white people was unlawful under the Race Relations Act .
The BNP chose to fight this opinion in the High Court .
The Commission issued county court proceedings against party leader Nick Griffin and two other officials .
The conclusion of the case in October 2009 saw costs awarded against the BNP.
The BNP stated that Griffin was "required in Brussels " on that day .
Griffin had written to BNP members preparing to concede the case because it would be too expensive to fight and would " strip the party of the ability to fight the next general election " .
Griffin subsequently announced that he would ask BNP members to accept the court 's decision and allow non-whites to join the party , claiming that this action "outflanked " the EHRC.
The BNP anticipated that its members would accept the change on financial grounds .
The BNP agreed to suspend further membership applications until an Extraordinary General Meeting in January 2010 confirming changes to the constitution .
As a result of the case , the Secretary of State for Wales , Peter Hain protested against the BBC 's inclusion of Griffin on the Question Time programme , claiming the court case meant the BNP was " an unlawful body " .
Shami Chakrabarti , director of Liberty , said : " A shiny new constitution does not a democratic party make .
It would be a pyrrhic victory , to say the least , if anyone thought that giving the BNP a facelift would make the slightest difference to a body with so much racism and hatred pumping through its veins . "
The courts declared that the new constitution still breached equality laws and was still indirectly discriminatory .
Judge Paul Collins ordered the BNP to pay costs and said its membership list must remain " closed " until it complied with race relations laws .
The BNP claimed that it had a waiting list of black and Asian people and wanted more applications from ethnic minorities .
In November 2010 , the BNP leadership was accused of lying over the matter by the EHRC who claimed that the offending passage had not been removed but merely altered .
In a subsequent hearing the BNP leadership was found not guilty of the contempt of court .
The EHRC said : " Eighteen months and seven court hearings later Mr Griffin has finally amended the constitution to bring it in line with what the Commission had originally requested . "
Griffin said : " This is a great day , because the British National Party has won a spectacular David and Goliath victory " .
Amongst the most visible and vocal opponents of the BNP are Unite Against Fascism ( UAF ) and the magazine " Searchlight " .
High-ranking politicians from each of the main parties have , at various times , called for their own supporters to vote for anyone but the BNP.
In 2008 , then Prime Minister Gordon Brown stated : " Londoners and the rest of the British people know that backing the BNP is totally at odds with what it really means to be British—and the great British values the rest of us share , such as democracy and decency , freedom and fairness , tolerance and equality . "
The British Government announced in 2009 that the BNP 's two MEPs would be denied some of the access and information afforded to other MEPs .
The BNP would be subject to the " same general principles governing official impartiality " and they would receive " standard written briefings as appropriate from time to time " , but diplomats would not be "proactive " in dealing with the BNP MEPs and that any requests for policy briefings from them would be treated differently and on a discretionary basis .
Some opponents of fascism call for no coverage to be given to groups or individuals enunciating what they describe as "hate speech" .
The " No Platform " stance is to deny perceived fascist hate speech any sort of publicity .
The policy is most commonly associated with university student unions and debating societies , but has also resulted in BNP candidates being banned from speaking at various hustings meetings around the country .
In 2005 , an invitation to Nick Griffin by the University of St Andrews Union Debating Society to participate in a debate on multiculturalism was withdrawn after protests .
In June 2009 , the Royal British Legion wrote to Griffin privately to ask him to stop wearing their poppy symbol .
After he refused and wore the badge at campaign events and on the party 's televised election broadcast , the Legion said in an open letter : " True valour deserves respect regardless of a person 's ethnic origin , and everyone who serves or has served their country deserves nothing less ... national chairman appealed to your sense of honour .
But you have responded by continuing to wear the poppy .
So now we 're no longer asking you privately .
In September 2009 , the Legion accepted a donation which it had initially rejected from BNP member Rachel Firth .
Firth had spent 24 hours raising the money , half of which was given to the Legion and the other half to the BNP.
The Legion said that Firth had assured them that the donation would not be exploited politically although the story was later " splashed across " the BNP 's website .
BNP spokesman Simon Darby denied that the party exploited the story .
Winston Churchill 's family has criticised the BNP after the party used his image and quotes from one of his speeches in its campaign .
Churchill 's grandson , Nicholas Soames , described the BNP as "monstrous " and said its use of Churchill was "offensive and disgusting" .
The BNP was also caught up in a dispute with the 1940s singer Vera Lynn after she objected to the party selling copies of her White Cliffs of Dover CD on its website to fund its European election campaign .
In the wake of the murder of Lee Rigby , there were protests and counter-protests between BNP supporters and Unite Against Fascism campaigners in London .
58 people were arrested , all UAF protesters , and at least one man , a BNP activist , was injured .
In September 2007 , " The Daily Telegraph " newspaper reported that Hitwise , the online competitive intelligence service , said that the BNP website had more hits than any other website of a British political party .
In 2009 , the party 's website came under fire after it was revealed that much of the merchandise it sold was made in Honduras , contrary to the party 's pledge of " British Jobs for British Workers " .
The BNP and the French National Front have co-operated on numerous occasions .
Jean-Marie Le Pen visited the UK in 2004 to assist in launching the BNP 's European Parliament campaign and Nick Griffin repaid the favour by sending a delegation of BNP officials to the FN 's annual ' First of May Joan of Arc parade ' in Paris in 2006 .
The BNP has links with the National Democratic Party of Germany .
Griffin addressed an NPD rally in August 2002 headed by Udo Voigt , who Gerhard Schroeder accused of trying to remove immigrants from eastern Germany .
In the run-up to the 2004 European Parliament election campaign , Nick Griffin visited Sweden to give the National Democrat party his endorsement .
In London on 16 May 2008 , Nick Griffin met leaders of the Hungarian far right party Jobbik to discuss co-operation between the two parties .
Griffin spoke at a Jobbik party rally in August 2008 .
In April 2009 , Simon Darby , deputy chairman of the BNP , was welcomed with fascist salutes by members of the Italian nationalist Forza Nuova during a trip to Milan .
Darby stated that the BNP would look to form an alliance with France 's Front National in the European Parliament ,
The Alliance of European National Movements ( AENM) was formed in Budapest on 24 October 2009 by a number of nationalist and far-right parties from countries in Europe .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Bubble and squeak is a traditional English dish made with the shallow-fried leftover vegetables from a roast dinner .
The main ingredients are potato and cabbage , but carrots , peas , Brussels sprouts , or any other leftover vegetables can be added .
The chopped vegetables ( and cold chopped meat if used ) are fried in a pan together with mashed potatoes or crushed roast potatoes until the mixture is well-cooked and brown on the sides .
The dish is so named because it makes bubbling and squeaking sounds during the cooking process .
It is often served with cold meat from the Sunday roast , and pickles or brown sauce , or as an accompaniment to a full English breakfast .
The meat was traditionally added to the bubble and squeak itself , although nowadays it is more commonly made without meat .
The earliest known recipe was by Maria Rundell in 1806 .
The name "bubble and squeak " is used primarily in England ( for Scotland and Ireland see ' Similar dishes ' ) , and it may also be understood in parts of some other Commonwealth countries and the United States .
Bubble and squeak was a popular dish during World War II , as it was an easy way of using leftovers during a period when most foods were subject to rationing .
In more recent times , prepared frozen and tinned versions have become available .
Bubble and squeak is also Cockney rhyming slang for Greek .
The company mascots of UK based gadget insurance company Protect Your Bubble are named after bubble and squeak .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Charles Hardin Holley ( September 7 , 1936 – February 3 , 1959 ) , known professionally as Buddy Holly , was an American musician and singer-songwriter and a pioneer of rock and roll .
Although his success lasted only a year and a half before his death in an airplane crash , Holly is described by critic Bruce Eder as " the single most influential creative force in early rock and roll . "
His works and innovations inspired and influenced contemporary and later musicians , notably the Beatles , Elvis Costello , the Rolling Stones , and Bob Dylan , and exerted a profound influence on popular music .
In 2004 , " Rolling Stone " magazine ranked Holly number 13 on its list of the 100 greatest artists of all time .
Charles Hardin Holley was born on September 7 , 1936 , in Lubbock , Texas , to Lawrence Odell and Ella Pauline ( Drake ) Holley .
In Philip Norman 's biography , it is stated that his mother 's family claimed to be descended from the English navigator Francis Drake .
Holly was always called " Buddy " by his family .
The youngest of three siblings , his older brothers Larry and Travis taught him to play a variety of instruments , including the guitar , four-string banjo and lap steel guitar .
At the age of five , Holly 's young voice and exuberance won him a talent contest singing a then-popular song , " Have You Ever Gone Sailing ( Down the River of Memories ) . "
In 1949 , while still retaining his youthful soprano voice , he recorded a bluesy solo rendering of Hank Snow 's " My Two Timin' Woman " on a wire recorder borrowed by a friend who worked in a music shop .
In 1952 , he met Bob Montgomery at Hutchinson Junior High School .
They shared an interest in music , and teamed up as " Buddy and Bob" .
Initially influenced by bluegrass , they sang harmony duets at local clubs and high school talent shows .
The duo performed on a local radio station KDAV Sunday broadcast that made them a top local act .
Hutchinson Junior High School now has a mural honoring Holly , and Lubbock High School , where he sang in the school choir , also honors the musician .
Holly saw Elvis Presley sing in Lubbock in 1955 , and began to incorporate a rockabilly style , similar to the Sun Records sound , which had a strong rhythm acoustic and slap bass .
On October 15 , 1955 , Holly , along with Bob Montgomery and Larry Welborn , opened the bill for Presley in Lubbock , catching the eye of a Nashville talent scout .
Holly 's transition to rock continued when he opened for Bill Haley & His Comets at a local show organized by Eddie Crandall , the manager for Marty Robbins .
Decca Records signed him to a contract in February 1956 , following this performance , misspelling his name as " Holly " .
He thereafter adopted the misspelled name for his professional career .
Holly formed his own band , later to be called The Crickets , consisting of Holly ( lead guitar and vocals ) , Niki Sullivan ( guitar ) , Joe B. Mauldin ( bass ) , and Jerry Allison ( drums ) .
They went to Nashville for three recording sessions with producer Owen Bradley .
Holly , however , chafed under a restrictive atmosphere that allowed him little input during the sessions .
Among the tracks he recorded was an early version of " That 'll Be The Day" , which took its title from a line delivered repeatedly by John Wayne 's character , Ethan Edwards , in the 1956 film " The Searchers " .
This initial version of the song was played slower and about four steps higher than the later hit version .
Decca released two Holly singles , " Blue Days , Black Nights " and " Modern Don Juan" , that failed to make an impression .
On January 22 , 1957 , Decca informed Holly his contract would not be renewed , insisting , however , that he could not record the same songs for anyone else for five years .
Holly then hired Norman Petty as manager , and the band began recording at Petty 's studios in Clovis , New Mexico .
Petty contacted music publishers and labels , and Brunswick Records , a subsidiary of Decca , signed the Crickets on March 19 , 1957.
Holly signed as a solo artist with another Decca subsidiary , Coral Records .
This put him in the unusual position of having two recording contracts at the same time .
On May 27 , 1957 , " That 'll Be The Day " was released as a single , credited to the Crickets to try to bypass Decca 's claimed legal rights .
When the song became a hit , Decca decided not to press its claim .
" That 'll Be the Day " topped the " Billboard " US " Best Sellers in Stores " chart on September 23 , and was No. 1 on the UK Singles Chart for three weeks in November .
The Crickets performed " That 'll Be the Day " and " Peggy Sue " on " The Ed Sullivan Show " on December 1 , 1957 ( followed by " Oh , Boy ! " on Sunday , January 26 , 1958 ) .
They also sang " Peggy Sue " on " The Arthur Murray Party " on December 29 and were given a polite introduction by Kathryn Murray .
The kinescopes of these programs are the only record of their 1957 television appearances .
Buddy Holly appeared on " American Bandstand " hosted by Dick Clark on ABC twice , on August 26 , 1957 and October 28 , 1958 as well as Clark 's primetime TV series " Saturday Night Beechnut Show " on October 25 , 1958 .
Holly helped win over an all-black audience to rock and roll/rockabilly when the Crickets were booked at New York 's Apollo Theater for August 16–22 , 1957.
Unlike the immediate acceptance shown in the 1978 movie " The Buddy Holly Story" , it actually took several performances for the audience to warm up to him .
In August 1957 , the Crickets were the only white performers on a national tour including black neighborhood theaters .
As Holly was signed both as a solo artist and a member of the Crickets , two debut albums were released : " The " Chirping " Crickets " on November 27 , 1957 and " Buddy Holly " on February 20 , 1958 .
His singles " Peggy Sue " and " Oh Boy ! " , with backing vocals later dubbed on by The Picks , reached the top ten of United States and United Kingdom charts .
Buddy Holly and the Crickets toured Australia in January 1958 and the UK in March .
Their third and final album , " That 'll Be the Day" , was put together from early recordings and was released in April .
In the liner notes to " Buddy Holly : The Definitive Collection" , Billy Altman notes that " Peggy Sue " was originally written as " Cindy Lou " ( after Holly 's niece ) , but Holly changed it prior to recording as a tip of the hat to Crickets drummer Jerry Allison 's girlfriend , Peggy Sue Gerron .
Allison wanted the song to be named after Gerron to make up for a recent fight .
Holly wrote " True Love Ways " about his relationship with his wife , Maria Elena .
The song was recorded on October 21 , 1958 at Decca 's Pythian Temple with Maria in attendance .
Dick Jacob , Coral-Brunswick 's new head of Artists and Repertoire , served as both producer and conductor of the song 's 18-piece orchestra that included members of the New York Symphony Orchestra , NBC Television 's house orchestra and Abraham " Boomie " Richman , formerly of Benny Goodman 's band .
In June 1958 , Holly met Maria Elena Santiago , a receptionist for Murray Deutch , an executive for New York publisher Peer-Southern Music .
Holly managed to have Santiago invited to a luncheon at Howard Johnson 's , thanks to Deutch 's secretary , Jo Harper .
He asked her to have dinner with him that night at P. J. Clarke 's .
Holly proposed marriage to her on their very first date .
" While we were having dinner , he got up and came back with his hands behind his back .
He brought out a red rose and said , ' This is for you .
Would you marry me ? ' Within the beautiful red rose , there was a ring .
Holly went to her guardian 's house the next morning and Maria came running at him and jumped into his arms , which was a sign to him that it was a "yes " .
They married in Lubbock on August 15 , 1958 , less than two months later .
On what would have been their 50th wedding anniversary , she told the " Lubbock Avalanche-Journal" :I 'd never had a boyfriend in my life .
But when I saw Buddy , it was like magic .
We had something special : love at first sight .
It was like we were made for each other .
He came into my life when I needed him , and I came into his .
Maria Elena traveled on tours , doing everything from the laundry to equipment setup to ensuring the group got paid .
However , many fans became aware of his marriage only after his death .
The ambitious Holly became increasingly interested in the New York music/recording/publishing scene , while his bandmates wanted to go back home to Lubbock .
As a result , the group split up in late 1958 .
The Hollys settled in Apartment 4H of the Brevoort Apartments located at 11 Fifth Avenue in Greenwich Village .
Here he recorded the series of acoustic songs , including " Crying , Waiting , Hoping " and " What to Do , " known as the " Apartment Tapes , " which were released after his death .
The Hollys frequented many of New York 's music venues , including The Village Gate , Blue Note , Village Vanguard , and Johnny Johnson 's .
Maria Elena reported Buddy was keen to learn fingerstyle flamenco guitar , and would often visit her aunt 's home to play the piano there .
He wanted to develop collaborations between soul singers and rock 'n' roll , hoping to make an album with Ray Charles and gospel legend Mahalia Jackson .
He also had ambitions to work in film , like Elvis Presley and Eddie Cochran , and registered for acting classes with Lee Strasburg 's Actors Studio , where the likes of Marlon Brando and James Dean had trained .
According to Billy Altman 's liner notes to the Geffen/ Universal compilation , " Buddy Holly : The Definitive Collection" , in addition to " True Love Ways " , during the October 1958 sessions at Decca 's Pythian Temple , Holly also recorded two other songs , " It Does n't Matter Anymore " and " Raining In My Heart . "
The songs were firsts for Holly , not only in the use of orchestral backing players , but also the tracks were his first stereo recordings .
They were also to be his last formal recording studio sessions .
Although Holly had already begun to become disillusioned with Norman Petty before meeting Maria Elena , it was through her and her aunt Provi , the head of Latin American music at Peer-Southern , that he began to fully realize what was going on with his manager , who was paying the band 's royalties into his own company 's account .
Holly was having trouble getting his royalties from Petty , so he hired the noted lawyer Harold Orenstein at the recommendation of his friends the Everly Brothers , who had engaged Orenstein following disputes with their own manager , Wesley Rose .
Yet , with the money still being withheld by Petty and with rent due , Buddy was forced to go back on the road .
Holly was offered a spot in the Winter Dance Party , a three-week tour across the Midwest opening on January 23 , 1959 , by the GAC agency , with other notable performers such as Dion and the Belmonts , Ritchie Valens , and J. P. " The Big Bopper " Richardson .
He assembled a backing band consisting of Tommy Allsup ( guitar ) , Waylon Jennings ( bass ) and Carl Bunch ( drums ) , and billed them as The Crickets .
Following a performance on the tour at the Surf Ballroom in Clear Lake , Iowa on February 2 , 1959 , Holly chartered a small airplane to take him and two others nearby Mason City to Moorhead , Minnesota , the next stop on the tour .
The charter 's pilot , Roger Peterson , took off in a snowstorm even though he was not qualified to fly by instruments only .
Following take off in the early morning hours of February 3 , Holly , along with Ritchie Valens , J. P. " The Big Bopper " Richardson , and the pilot , were all killed when the plane crashed shortly after takeoff .
Rock performer , archivist and music historian , Harry Hepcat , wrote in his article about Buddy Holly , " Although the plane came down only five miles northwest of the airport , no one saw or heard the crash .
The bodies lay in the blowing snow through the night ... February indeed made us shiver , but it was more than the cold of February that third day of the month in 1959 .
It was the shiver of a greater , sometimes senseless , reality invading our sheltered , partying , teenaged life of the 50's . "
Bandmate Waylon Jennings had given up his seat on the ill-fated flight , causing Holly to jokingly tell Jennings , " I hope your ol ' bus freezes up ! " Jennings shot back facetiously , " Well , I hope your ol ' plane crashes ! " Reportedly , it was a statement that would haunt Jennings for decades .
Holly 's funeral was held on February 7 , 1959 , at the Tabernacle Baptist Church in Lubbock .
The service was officiated by Ben D. Johnson , who had presided at the Hollys ' wedding just months earlier .
The pallbearers were Jerry Allison , Joe B. Mauldin , Niki Sullivan , Bob Montgomery , Sonny Curtis and Phil Everly .
Waylon Jennings was unable to attend due to his commitment to the still-touring Winter Dance Party .
Holly 's body was interred in the City of Lubbock Cemetery in the eastern part of the city .
His headstone carries the correct spelling of his surname ( Holley ) and a carving of his Fender Stratocaster guitar .
Holly 's wife , María Elena Holly , was pregnant at the time of the crash .
She miscarried the day after learning of his death , reportedly due to “psychological trauma” .
Because of this incident , authorities found it necessary , in the months following , to implement a policy against announcing victims ' names until after families had first been informed .
María Elena Holly did not attend the funeral , and has never visited the gravesite .
I was not feeling well when he left .
I was two weeks pregnant , and I wanted Buddy to stay with me , but he had scheduled that tour .
It was the only time I was n't with him .
And I blame myself because I know that , if only I had gone along , Buddy never would have gotten into that airplane .
The first song to commemorate the musicians was " Three Stars " by Tommy Dee .
This song was recorded just one day after the disaster occurred .
Twelve years later , in 1971 , Don McLean released his single , " American Pie” , to commemorate Buddy Holly 's death and further accentuate the loss of the United States ' innocence .
Don McLean 's song began the reference to the tragedy as " The Day the Music Died " .
Holly set the template for the standard rock and roll band : two guitars , bass , and drums .
He was one of the first in the genre to write , produce , and perform his own songs .
Holly managed to bridge the racial divide that marked music in America .
Along with Elvis and others , Holly made rock and roll , with its roots in rockabilly country music and blues-inspired rhythm and blues music , more popular among a broad white audience .
From listening to their recordings , one had difficulty determining if the Crickets , the name of Buddy 's band , were white or black singers .
Holly indeed sometimes played with black musicians Little Richard and Chuck Berry , and incorporated the Bo Diddley beat in several songs .
The Crickets were only the second white rock group to tour Great Britain .
Holly was also famous for his distinctive , black-framed eyeglasses , which have since become a lasting part of his iconic image .
As a result , countless other musicians ( Hank Marvin , John Lennon , Elton John and Elvis Costello ) were inspired to wear their own glasses during their performances .
Initially , Holly was hesitant to wear his glasses on-stage , out of fear that they would contrast with his "rebellious " image .
But since Holly had very poor vision ( his visual acuity was allegedly 20/800 ) and contact lenses were n't as prevalent in the 1950s , Holly was left with little choice but to wear his glasses .
Contrary to popular belief , teenagers John Lennon and Paul McCartney did not attend a Holly concert , although they watched his television appearance on " Sunday Night at the London Palladium" .
Ian Whitcomb once said " Buddy Holly and the Crickets had the most influence on the Beatles . "
Lennon and McCartney later cited Holly as a primary influence .
( Their bug-themed band 's name , The Beatles , was chosen partly in homage to Holly 's Crickets . )
During breaks of The Beatles first appearance on " The Ed Sullivan Show " on February 9 , 1964 , CBS coordinator Vic Calandra talked with Paul McCartney and John Lennon .
Lennon asked him if he was working on the show in 1957 when one of their favorite groups was a guest .
" They were huge fans of Buddy Holly and the Crickets and John asked me , ' Buddy Holly , was this the stage he was on ? '
I said , ' Yeah , in fact , I held cue cards for them . '
The Beatles did a cover version of " Words of Love " that was a close reproduction of Holly 's version , released on late 1964 's " Beatles for Sale " ( in the U.S. , in June 1965 on " Beatles VI" ) .
During the January 1969 sessions for the " Let It Be " album , the Beatles played a slow impromptu version of " Mailman , Bring Me No More Blues " — although not written by Holly , it was popularized by him – with Lennon mimicking Holly 's vocal style ; the recording was eventually released in the mid-1990s on " Anthology 3" .
Also , Holly 's " That 'll Be the Day" , which had been covered by The Quarrymen was released on " Anthology 1" .
In addition , John Lennon recorded a cover version of " Peggy Sue " on his 1975 album " Rock 'n' Roll" .
McCartney owns the publishing rights to Holly 's song catalogue .
A 17-year-old Bob Dylan attended the January 31 , 1959 show , two nights before Holly 's death .
Dylan referred to this in his 1998 Grammy acceptance speech for his " Time Out of Mind " being named Album of the Year :
Keith Richards attended one of Holly 's performances , where he heard " Not Fade Away " for the first time .
The Rolling Stones had an early hit covering the song .
The launch of Bobby Vee 's successful musical career resulted from Holly 's death , when he was selected to replace Holly on the tour that continued after the plane crash .
Holly 's profound influence on Vee 's singing style can be heard in such songs as " Rubber Ball " ( the flip side of which was a cover of Holly 's " Everyday " ) and " Run to Him . "
Holly influenced many other singers during and after a career that lasted barely two years .
Keith Richards once said Holly had " an influence on everybody . "
In an August 24 , 1978 , " Rolling Stone " interview , Bruce Springsteen told Dave Marsh , " I play Buddy Holly every night before I go on ; that keeps me honest . "
The Grateful Dead performed " Not Fade Away " 530 times over the course of their career , making it their seventh most-performed song .
The song also appears on eight of their official live recording releases .
Various rock and roll histories have asserted the singing group The Hollies were named in homage to Buddy Holly .
According to the band 's website , although the group admired Holly ( and years later produced an album covering some of his songs ) , their name was inspired primarily by the sprigs of holly in evidence around Christmas of 1962 .
Don McLean 's popular 1971 ballad " American Pie " is inspired by Holly and the day of the plane crash .
The " American Pie " album is dedicated to Holly .
On September 7 , 1994 ( Holly 's 58th birthday ) , Weezer released their single " Buddy Holly" .
Buddy Holly released three albums in his lifetime .
However , he recorded so prolifically that Coral Records was able to release brand-new albums and singles for 10 years after his death , although the technical quality was mixed , some being studio quality and others home recordings .
Buddy Holly continued to be promoted and sold as an "active " artist , and his records had a loyal following , especially in Europe .
The demand for unissued Holly material was so great that Norman Petty resorted to overdubbing whatever he could find : alternate takes of studio recordings , originally rejected masters , " Crying , Waiting , Hoping " and the other five 1959 tracks (adding new surf-guitar arrangements ) , and even Holly 's amateur demos from 1954 ( where the low-fidelity vocals are often muffled behind the new orchestrations ) .
The last new Buddy Holly album was " Giant " ( featuring the single " Love Is Strange " ) , issued in 1969 .
Between the 1959–60 overdubs produced by Jack Hansen ( with vocal backings imitating the Crickets ' sound ) , the 1960s overdubs produced by Petty , various alternate takes , and Holly 's undubbed originals , collectors can often choose from multiple versions of the same song .
There are also many different versions of Holly 's " Greatest Hits " as well as covers/compilation albums of Buddy 's songs performed by various artists .
Holly 's life story inspired a Hollywood biographical film , " The Buddy Holly Story " ( 1978 ) .
Star Gary Busey received a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Actor for his portrayal of Holly .
The movie was widely criticized by the rock community and Holly 's friends and family for its inaccuracies .
This led Paul McCartney to produce and host his own documentary about Holly in 1985 , titled " The Real Buddy Holly Story " .
This video includes interviews with Keith Richards , Phil and Don Everly , Sonny Curtis , Jerry Allison , Holly 's family , and McCartney himself , among others .
In 1987 , Marshall Crenshaw portrayed Buddy Holly in the movie " La Bamba" .
He is featured performing at the Surf Ballroom and boarding the doomed airplane with Ritchie Valens and The Big Bopper .
Crenshaw 's version of " Crying , Waiting , Hoping " is featured on the " La Bamba " original motion picture soundtrack .
" Buddy – The Buddy Holly Story" , the jukebox musical depicting his life , is credited as being the first of its kind , spawning a breed of jukebox shows , including the likes of " Mamma Mia ! " and " We Will Rock You " .
" Buddy " – as it is abbreviated on occasion – is still running in the UK after 22 years , with a UK tour that went out in February 2011 .
Holly was depicted in the " Quantum Leap " episode entitled " How the Tess Was Won " although his identity is n't revealed until the very end of the episode .
According to this episode , Dr. Sam Beckett ( Scott Bakula ) influences Buddy Holly to change the lyrics from "piggy , suey " to " Peggy Sue" , thus setting up Holly 's future hit song .
There are also a number of acts both in the US ( Johnny Rogers , John Mueller ) and UK ( Marc Robinson , Spencer J etc. ) who specialize in performing Holly 's songs .
In 2010 , Guy Kent portrayed a modern-day interpretation of Holly in the independent film " The Day the Music Died " .
The film has yet to be theatrically released .
Holly was based in Lubbock , Texas , as his career took off between 1956 and 1958 .
In 1980 , Grant Speed sculpted a statue of Holly playing his Fender guitar .
This statue is the centerpiece of Lubbock 's Walk of Fame , which honors notable people who contributed to Lubbock 's musical history .
Other memorials to Buddy Holly include a street named in his honor and The Buddy Holly Center , which contains a museum of Holly memorabilia as well as a Fine Arts Gallery .
The Center is located on Crickets Avenue , one street over from Buddy Holly Avenue , in what used to be the Fort Worth and Denver South Plains Railway Depot .
In 2010 , Grant Speed 's statue was taken down for refurbishment , and construction began on a new Walk of Fame .
On May 9 , 2011 , the City of Lubbock held a ribbon-cutting ceremony for the Buddy and Maria Elena Holly Plaza , the new home of the statue and the Walk of Fame .
The plaza is across the street from the museum .
On September 7 , 2011 ( what would have been Holly 's 75th birthday ) , he received his star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame posthumously .
His widow , Maria Elena Santiago , attended , as did Phil Everly , Peter Asher , Priscilla Presley and actor Gary Busey , who played Holly in " The Buddy Holly Story " .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
jumping , is an activity where participants jump from fixed objects and use a parachute to break their fall .
"BASE" is an acronym that stands for four categories of fixed objects from which one can jump : building , antenna , span , and Earth ( cliff ) .
In the USA , BASE jumping is currently regarded by many as a fringe extreme sport or stunt .
the online "BASE Fatality List " records 230 deaths for BASE jumping since April 1981 .
The acronym " B.A.S.E. " ( now more commonly "BASE" ) was coined by filmmaker Carl Boenish , his wife Jean Boenish , Phil Smith , and Phil Mayfield .
Carl Boenish was the catalyst behind modern BASE jumping , and in 1978 , he filmed the first BASE jumps to be made using ram-air parachutes and the freefall tracking technique ( from El Capitan , in Yosemite National Park ) .
While BASE jumps had been made prior to that time , the El Capitan activity was the effective birth of what is now called BASE jumping .
BASE numbers are awarded to those who have made at least one jump from each of the four categories ( buildings , antennas , spans and earth ) .
When Phil Smith and Phil Mayfield jumped together from a Houston skyscraper on 18 January 1981 , they became the first to attain the exclusive BASE numbers ( BASE # 1 and #2 , respectively ) , having already jumped from an antenna , spans , and earthen objects .
Jean and Carl Boenish qualified for BASE numbers 3 and 4 soon after .
A separate "award " was soon enacted for Night BASE jumping when Mayfield completed each category at night , becoming Night BASE # 1 , with Smith qualifying a few weeks later .
During the early eighties , nearly all BASE jumps were made using standard skydiving equipment , including two parachutes ( main and reserve ) , and deployment components .
Later on , specialized equipment and techniques were developed specifically for the unique needs of BASE jumping .
Upon completing a jump from all of the four object categories , a jumper may choose to apply for a "BASE number " , which are awarded sequentially .
BASE # 1 was awarded to Phil Smith of Houston , Texas in 1981 .
The 1000th application for a BASE number was filed in March 2005 and BASE # 1000 was awarded to Matt Moilanen of Kalamazoo , Michigan .
BASE jumping is often featured in action movies .
The 2002 Vin Diesel film "xXx " includes a scene where Diesel 's character catapults himself off the Foresthill Bridge in an open-topped car , landing safely as the car crashes on the ground .
In the movie " " , includes the scene in which the main characters jump with wing suits from the IFC Tower in Hong Kong and fly over the Bank of China , finally opening their parachutes to land on a moving freighter .
The stunt was done live , with no special effects , by base jumpers Martin Rosén and Per Eriksson , members of the Swedish " Team Bautasten" .
The scene was filmed by air-to-air camera man Mikael Nordqvist from the same team .
Since the 1976 Mount Asgard jump featured in the pre-credits sequence to " The Spy Who Loved Me" , James Bond movies have featured several BASE jumps , including one from the Eiffel Tower in 1985 's " A View to a Kill" , the Rock of Gibraltar in 1987 's " The Living Daylights " , and in " Die Another Day" , 2002 , Pierce Brosnan as James Bond jumps from a melting iceberg .
Of the James Bond jumps only the Mt Asgard and Eiffel Tower jumps were filmed live ; the rest were special effects .
And in 2005 's " Batman Begins " , Bruce Wayne uses BASE jumping as inspiration for his memory cloth cape .
A series of BASE jumps are featured in the video for a remix of M83 's " Lower Your Eyelids to Die With the Sun" .
" Guinness World Records " first listed a BASE jumping record with Carl Boenish 's 1984 leap from Trollveggen ( Troll Wall ) in Norway .
It was described as the highest BASE jump .
( The jump was made two days before Boenish 's death at the same site . )
This record category is still in the " Guinness " book and is currently held by Australians Glenn Singleman and Heather Swan with a jump from Meru Peak in northern India at a starting elevation of .
On July 8 , 2006 Captain Daniel G. Schilling set the Guinness World Record for the most BASE jumps in a twenty-four hour period .
Schilling jumped off the Perrine Bridge in Twin Falls , Idaho a record 201 times .
BASE competitions have been held since the early 1980s , with accurate landings or free fall aerobatics used as the judging criteria .
Recent years have seen a formal competition held at the high Petronas Towers in Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia , judged on landing accuracy .
In 2010 North west Norway celebrated with a world record with 53 Base jumpers jumping from a cliff .
However , these and other sporadic incidents were one-time experiments , not the systematic pursuit of a new form of parachuting .
After 1978 , the filmed jumps from El Capitan were repeated , not as a publicity exercise or as a movie stunt , but as a true recreational activity .
It was this that popularised BASE jumping more widely among parachutists .
Carl Boenish continued to publish films and informational magazines on BASE jumping until his death in 1984 after a BASE-jump off of the Troll Wall .
By this time , the concept had spread among skydivers worldwide , with hundreds of participants making fixed-object jumps .
BASE jumps are generally made from much lower altitudes than skydives , and a BASE jump takes place close to the object serving as the jump platform .
Because BASE jumps generally entail slower airspeeds than typical skydives ( due to the limited altitude ) , a BASE jumper does not always reach terminal velocity .
Because higher airspeeds enable jumpers more aerodynamic control of their bodies , as well as more positive and quick parachute openings , the longer the delay , the better .
BASE jumping is significantly more dangerous than similar sports such as skydiving from aircraft .
Skydivers use the air flow to stabilize their position , allowing the parachute to deploy cleanly .
BASE jumpers , falling at lower speeds , have less aerodynamic control , and may tumble .
The attitude of the body at the moment of jumping determines the stability of flight in the first few seconds , before sufficient airspeed has built up to enable aerodynamic stability .
On low BASE jumps , parachute deployment takes place during this early phase of flight , so if a poor "launch " leads into a tumble , the jumper may not be able to correct this before the opening .
If the parachute is deployed while the jumper is tumbling , there is a high risk of entanglement or malfunction .
The jumper may also not be facing the right direction .
Such an off-heading opening is not as problematic in skydiving , but an off-heading opening that results in object strike has caused many serious injuries and deaths in BASE jumping .
At an altitude of 600m ( 2,000 feet ) , having been in free-fall for at least 300m ( 1,000 feet ) , the jumper is falling at approximately 55 m/s ( 190 km/h , 120 mph ) , and is approximately 10.9 seconds from the ground .
Most BASE jumps are made from less than 600m ( 2,000 feet ) .
For example , a BASE jump from a 150m ( 500 foot ) object is about 5.6 seconds from the ground if the jumper remains in free fall .
On a BASE jump , the parachute must open at about half the airspeed of a similar skydive , and more quickly ( in a shorter distance fallen ) .
Standard skydiving parachute systems are not designed for this situation , so BASE jumpers often use specially designed harnesses and parachute containers , with extra large pilot chutes , and many jump with only one parachute , since there would be little time to utilize a reserve parachute .
If modified , by removing the bag and slider , stowing the lines in a tail pocket , and fitting a large pilot chute , standard skydiving gear can be used for lower BASE jumps , but is then prone to kinds of malfunction that are rare in normal skydiving ( such as "line-overs " and broken lines ) .
Another risk is that most BASE jumping venues have very small areas in which to land .
A beginner skydiver , after parachute deployment , may have a three minute or more parachute ride to the ground .
A BASE jump from 150m ( 500 foot ) will have a parachute ride of only 10 to 15 seconds .
One way to make a parachute open very quickly is to use a static line or direct bag .
These devices form an attachment between the parachute and the jump platform , which stretches out the parachute and suspension lines as the jumper falls , before separating and allowing the parachute to inflate .
This method enables the very lowest jumps ( below 60m / 200 ft ) to be made , although most BASE jumpers are more motivated to make higher jumps involving free fall .
This method is similar to the paratrooper 's deployment system , also called a PCA ( Pilot Chute Assist ) .
The legal issues are that a BASE jumper must consider concern permissions to use the object from which the jump is initiated and the area used for landing .
Surreptitious BASE jumps are often made from tall buildings and antenna towers .
Many such BASE jumps must be covert because the owners of these objects are generally reluctant to allow their object to be used as a platform .
While BASE jumping itself is generally not illegal , making events such as the " Go Fast Games " at the Royal Gorge Bridge possible , the covert nature of accessing objects usually necessitates trespassing on an object .
Jumpers who are caught can expect to be charged with trespassing , as well as having charges like breaking and entering , reckless endangerment , vandalism , or other such charges pressed against them .
Other people accompanying the jumper , such as ground crew , may also face charges .
In some jurisdictions it may be permissible to use land until specifically told not to .
Perrine Bridge in Twin Falls , Idaho , is an example of a man-made structure in the United States where BASE jumping is allowed year-round without a permit .
Once a year , on the third Saturday in October ( " Bridge Day " ) , permission to BASE jump has explicitly been granted at the New River Gorge Bridge in Fayetteville , West Virginia .
The New River Gorge Bridge deck is 876 feet ( 297 m ) above the river .
This annual event attracts about 450 BASE jumpers and nearly 200,000 spectators .
1,100 jumps may occur during the six hours that it is legal provided good conditions .
For many skydivers who would like to try BASE jumping , this bridge will be the only fixed object from which they ever jump .
On 21 October 2006 , veteran BASE jumper Brian Lee Schubert of Alta Loma , California died while jumping from the New River Gorge Bridge during Bridge Day activities because his parachute opened late ; he plummeted to his death in the waters below .
Jumps continued after the recovery of his body .
He and his friend Michael Pelkey were the first to make a BASE jump from El Capitan in Yosemite National Park in 1966 .
The National Park Service ( NPS) has the authority to ban specific activities in US National Parks and has done so for BASE jumping .
The authority comes from 36 CFR 2.17( 3 ) , which prohibits , " Delivering or retrieving a person or object by parachute , helicopter , or other airborne means , except in emergencies involving public safety or serious property loss , or pursuant to the terms and conditions of a permit . "
Under that Regulation , BASE is not banned , but is allowable if a permit is issued by the Superintendent , which means that a mechanism to allow BASE in National Parks was always in place .
However , National Park Service Management Policies have stated that BASE "is not an appropriate public use activity within national park areas .. . " ( 2001 Management Policy 8.2.2.7. )
This policy bans air delivery but includes a proposal to replace the language that bans it with a different text .
The fate and effects of this proposal are unknown .
During the early days of BASE jumping , the NPS issued permits that authorized jumps from El Capitan .
This program ran for three months in 1980 and then collapsed amid allegations of abuse by unauthorized jumpers .
The NPS has since vigorously enforced the ban , charging jumpers with " aerial delivery into a National Park" .
Although one jumper drowned in the Merced River while being chased by Park Rangers intent on arresting him , illegal jumps continue in Yosemite at a rate estimated at a few hundred per year , often at night or dawn .
El Capitan , Half Dome and Glacier Point have been used as jump sites .
Other US public land , including land controlled by the Bureau of Land Management , does not ban air delivery , and there are numerous jumpable objects on BLM land .
The legal position is different at other sites and in other countries .
For example , in Norway 's Lysefjord ( from the mountain Kjerag ) , BASE jumpers are made welcome .
Many sites in the European Alps , near Chamonix and on the Eiger , are also open to jumpers .
Some other Norwegian places , like the Troll Wall , are banned because of dangerous rescue missions in the past .
In Austria , jumping from mountain cliffs is generally allowed , whereas the use of bridges ( such as the Europabruecke near Innsbruck , Tirol ) or dams is generally prohibited .
Australia has some of the toughest stances on BASE jumping : it specifically bans BASE jumping from certain objects , such as the Sydney Harbor Bridge .
BASE jumping as of 2006 has an overall fatality rate estimated at about one fatality per sixty participants .
A study of 20,850 BASE jumps from the same site ( the Kjerag Massif in Norway ) reported 9 fatalities over the 11-year period from 1995 to 2005 , or 1 in every 2,317 jumps .
However , at that site , 1 in every 254 jumps over that period resulted in a nonfatal accident .
BASE jumping is one of the most dangerous recreational activities in the world , with a fatality and injury rate 43 times higher than parachuting from a plane .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Robert ( Bob ) M. Frankston ( born June 14 , 1949 in Brooklyn , New York ) is the co-creator with Dan Bricklin of the VisiCalc spreadsheet program and the co-founder of Software Arts , the company that developed it .
Frankston graduated in 1966 from Stuyvesant High School in New York City and in 1970 from M.I.T.
Frankston has received numerous honors and awards for his work :
In recent years , Frankston has been an outspoken advocate for reducing the role of telecommunications companies in the evolution of the internet , particularly with respect to broadband and mobile communications .
He coined the term " Regulatorium " to describe what he considers collusion between telecommunication companies and their regulators that prevents change .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
The Book of Haggai is a book of the Hebrew Bible or Tanakh , and has its place as the antepenultimate of the Minor Prophets .
It is a short book , consisting of only two chapters .
The historical setting dates around 520 BCE before the Temple has been rebuilt .
520 BCE falls between the start of the Persian empire in 539 BCE and 520 BCE a period that saw major kings such as Zerubbabel help lead the Jews in their return to the land .
The Book of Haggai is named after its presumed author , the prophet Haggai .
There is no biographical information given about the prophet in the Book of Haggai , so we know no personal information about him .
Haggai 's name is derived from the Hebrew verbal root "hgg" , which means " to make a pilgrimage . "
W. Sibley Towner suggests that Haggai 's name might come "from his single-minded effort to bring about the reconstruction of that destination of ancient Judean pilgrims , the Temple in Jerusalem . "
The " Book of Haggai " was written in 520 BCE some 18 years after Cyrus had conquered Babylon and issued a decree in 538 BCE allowing the captive Jews to return to Judea .
Cyrus saw the restoration of the temple as necessary for the restoration of the religious practices and a sense of peoplehood after a long exile .
Haggai 's message is filled with an urgency for the people to proceed with the rebuilding of the second Jerusalem temple .
Haggai attributes a recent drought to the people 's refusal to rebuild the temple , which he sees as key to Jerusalem’s glory .
The book ends with the prediction of the downfall of kingdoms , with one Zerubbabel , governor of Judah , as the Lord’s chosen leader .
The language here is not as finely wrought as in some other books of the minor prophets , yet the intent seems straightforward .
The first chapter contains the first address ( 2–11 ) and its effects ( 12–15 ) .
These discourses are referred to in Ezra 5:1 and 6:14 .
Haggai reports that three weeks after his first prophecy , the rebuilding of the Temple began on September 7 521 BCE.
" They came and began to work on the house of the LORD Almighty , their God , on the twenty-fourth day of the sixth month in the second year of King Darius .( Haggai
1:14–15 ) and the Book of Ezra indicates that it was finished on February 25 516 BCE " The Temple was completed on the third day of the month Adar , in the sixth year of the reign of King Darius . "
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
Beatrix Potter ( born Helen Beatrix Potter ; 28 July 186622 December 1943 ) was an English author , illustrator , natural scientist and conservationist best known for her imaginative children 's books , featuring animals such as those in " The Tale of Peter Rabbit" , which celebrated the British landscape and country life .
Born into a wealthy Unitarian family , Potter , along with her younger brother Walter Bertram ( 1872–1918 ) , grew up with few friends outside her large extended family .
Her parents were artistic , interested in nature and enjoyed the countryside .
As children , Beatrix and Bertram had numerous small animals as pets which they observed closely and drew endlessly .
Summer holidays were spent away from London , in Scotland and in the English Lake District where Beatrix developed a love of the natural world which was the subject of her painting from an early age .
She was educated by private governesses until she was 18 .
Her study of languages , literature , science and history was broad and she was an eager student .
She enjoyed private art lessons , and developed her own style , favouring watercolour .
Along with her drawings of her animals , real and imagined , she illustrated insects , fossils , archaeological artefacts , and fungi .
In the 1890s her mycological illustrations and research into the reproduction of fungus spores generated interest from the scientific establishment .
Following some success illustrating cards and booklets , Potter wrote and illustrated " The Tale of Peter Rabbit" , publishing it first privately in 1901 , and a year later as a small , three-colour illustrated book with Frederick Warne & Co.
She became unofficially engaged to her editor Norman Warne in 1905 despite the disapproval of her parents , but he died suddenly a month later of leukemia .
With the proceeds from the books and a legacy from an aunt , Potter bought Hill Top Farm in Near Sawrey , a tiny village in Cumbria , the English Lake District near Windermere , in 1905 .
Over the following decades , she purchased additional farms to preserve the unique hill country landscape .
In 1913 , at the age of 47 , she married William Heelis , a respected local solicitor from Hawkshead .
Potter was also a prize-winning breeder of Herdwick sheep and a prosperous farmer keenly interested in land preservation .
She continued to write , illustrate and design spin-off merchandise based on her children 's books for Warne until the duties of land management and her diminishing eyesight made it difficult to continue .
Potter published over 23 books : the best known are those written between 1902 and 1922 .
She died of pneumonia/heart disease on 22 December 1943 at her home in Near Sawrey at age 77 , leaving almost all her property to the National Trust .
She is credited with preserving much of the land that now comprises the Lake District National Park .
Potter 's books continue to sell throughout the world , in many languages .
Her stories have been retold in song , film , ballet and animation .
" The World of Peter Rabbit and Friends " , a TV series based on her stories , has been released on VHS by Pickwick Video and later Carlton Video .
Potter 's paternal grandfather , Edmund Potter , from Glossop in Derbyshire , owned what was then the largest calico printing works in England , and later served as a Member of Parliament .
Beatrix 's father , Rupert William Potter ( 1832–1914 ) , was educated at Manchester College by the Unitarian philosopher Dr. James Martineau .
Potter 's family on both sides were from the Manchester area .
They were English Unitarians , a dissenting Protestant sect who rejected the doctrine of the Trinity .
Beatrix was educated by three able governesses , the last of whom was Annie Moore ( "née " Carter ) , just three years older than Beatrix , who tutored Beatrix in German as well as acting as lady 's companion .
She and Beatrix remained friends throughout their lives and Annie 's eight children were the recipients of many of Potter 's delightful picture letters .
It was Annie who later suggested that these letters might make good children’s books .
In their school room Beatrix and Bertram kept a variety of small pets , mice , rabbits , a hedgehog and some bats , along with collections of butterflies and other insects which they drew and studied .
Beatrix was devoted to the care of her small animals , often taking them with her on long holidays .
In most of the first fifteen years of her life , Beatrix spent summer holidays at Dalguise , an estate on the River Tay in Perthshire , Scotland .
There she sketched and explored an area that nourished her imagination and her observation .
Beatrix and her brother were allowed great freedom in the country and both children became adept students of natural history .
In 1887 , when Dalguise was no longer available , the Potters took their first summer holiday in the Lake District , at Wray Castle near Windermere .
Here Beatrix met Hardwicke Rawnsley , vicar of Wray and later the founding secretary of the National Trust , whose interest in the countryside and country life inspired the same in Beatrix and who was to have a lasting impact on her life .
About the age of 14 Beatrix began to keep a diary .
It was written in a code of her own devising which was a simple letter for letter substitution .
Her " Journal " was important to the development of her creativity , serving as both sketchbook and literary experiment : in tiny handwriting she reported on society , recorded her impressions of art and artists , recounted stories and observed life around her .
The " Journal" , decoded and transcribed by Leslie Linder in 1958 , does not provide an intimate record of her personal life , but it is an invaluable source for understanding a vibrant part of British society in the late 19th century .
It describes Potter 's maturing artistic and intellectual interests , her often amusing insights on the places she visited , and her unusual ability to observe nature and to describe it .
Started in 1881 , her journal ends in 1897 when her artistic and intellectual energies were absorbed in scientific study and in efforts to publish her drawings .
Precocious but reserved and often bored , she was searching for more independent activities and wished to earn some money of her own whilst dutifully taking care of her parents , dealing with her especially demanding mother , and managing their various households .
Beatrix Potter 's parents did not discourage higher education .
As was common in the Victorian era , women of her class were privately educated and rarely went to university .
Beatrix Potter was interested in every branch of natural science save astronomy .
Botany was a passion for most Victorians and nature study was a popular enthusiasm .
Potter was eclectic in her tastes : collecting fossils , studying archeological artefacts from London excavations , and interested in entomology .
In all these areas she drew and painted her specimens with increasing skill .
By the 1890s her scientific interests centred on mycology .
First drawn to fungi because of their colours and evanescence in nature and her delight in painting them , her interest deepened after meeting Charles McIntosh , a revered naturalist and mycologist , during a summer holiday in Dunkeld in Perthshire in 1892 .
He helped improve the accuracy of her illustrations , taught her taxonomy , and supplied her with live specimens to paint during the winter .
Curious as to how fungi reproduced , Potter began microscopic drawings of fungus spores ( the agarics ) and in 1895 developed a theory of their germination .
Through the connections of her uncle Sir Henry Enfield Roscoe , a chemist and vice-chancellor of the University of London , she consulted with botanists at Kew Gardens , convincing George Massee of her ability to germinate spores and her theory of hybridisation .
She did not believe in the theory of symbiosis proposed by Simon Schwendener , the German mycologist , as previously thought ; rather she proposed a more independent process of reproduction .
Rebuffed by William Thiselton-Dyer , the Director at Kew , because of her gender and her amateur status , Beatrix wrote up her conclusions and submitted a paper , " On the Germination of the Spores of the Agaricineae" , to the Linnean Society in 1897 .
It was introduced by Massee because , as a female , Potter could not attend proceedings or read her paper .
She subsequently withdrew it , realising that some of her samples were contaminated , but continued her microscopic studies for several more years .
Her paper has only recently been rediscovered , along with the rich , artistic illustrations and drawings that accompanied it .
Her work is only now being properly evaluated .
Potter later gave her other mycological and scientific drawings to the Armitt Museum and Library in Ambleside , where mycologists still refer to them to identify fungi .
There is also a collection of her fungus paintings at the Perth Museum and Art Gallery in Perth , Scotland donated by Charles McIntosh .
In 1967 the mycologist W.P.K. Findlay included many of Potter 's beautifully accurate fungus drawings in his " Wayside & Woodland Fungi" , thereby fulfilling her desire to one day have her fungus drawings published in a book .
In 1997 the Linnean Society issued a posthumous apology to Potter for the sexism displayed in its handling of her research .
Potter’s artistic and literary interests were deeply influenced by fairies , fairy tales and fantasy .
She was a student of the classic fairy tales of Western Europe .
As well as stories from the Old Testament , John Bunyan 's " The Pilgrim 's Progress " and Harriet Beecher Stowe 's " Uncle Tom 's Cabin" , she grew up with " Aesop 's Fables " , the fairy tales of the Brothers Grimm and Hans Christian Andersen , Charles Kingsley 's " The Water Babies " , the folk tales and mythology of Scotland , the German Romantics , Shakespeare , and the romances of Sir Walter Scott .
As a young child , before the age of eight , Edward Lear 's " Book of Nonsense" , including the much loved " The Owl and the Pussycat" , and Lewis Carroll 's " Alice in Wonderland " had made their impression , although she later said of " Alice " that she was more interested in Tenniel 's illustrations than what they were about .
The " Brer Rabbit " stories of Joel Chandler Harris had been family favourites , and she later studied his " Uncle Remus " stories and illustrated them .
She studied book illustration from a young age and developed her own tastes , but the work of the picture book triumvirate Walter Crane , Kate Greenaway and Randolph Caldecott , the last an illustrator whose work was later collected by her father , was a great influence .
When she started to illustrate , she chose first the traditional rhymes and stories , " Cinderella" , " Sleeping Beauty" , " Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves " , " Puss-in-boots " , and " Red Riding Hood " .
But most often her illustrations were fantasies featuring her own pets : mice , rabbits , kittens , and guinea pigs .
In her teenage years Potter was a regular visitor to the art galleries of London , particularly enjoying the summer and winter exhibitions at the Royal Academy in London .
Her " Journal " reveals her growing sophistication as a critic as well as the influence of her father 's friend , the artist Sir John Everett Millais , who recognised Beatrix 's talent of observation .
Although Potter was aware of art and artistic trends , her drawing and her prose style were uniquely her own .
As a way to earn money in the 1890s , Beatrix and her brother began to print Christmas cards of their own design , as well as cards for special occasions .
Mice and rabbits were the most frequent subject of her fantasy paintings .
In 1890 the firm of Hildesheimer and Faulkner bought several of her drawings of her rabbit Benjamin Bunny to illustrate verses by Frederic Weatherly titled " A Happy Pair" .
In 1893 the same printer bought several more drawings for Weatherly 's " Our Dear Relations " , another book of rhymes , and the following year Potter sold a series of frog illustrations and verses for " Changing Pictures " , a popular annual offered by the art publisher Ernest Nister .
Potter was pleased by this success and determined to publish her own illustrated stories .
Whenever Potter went on holiday to the Lake District or Scotland , she sent letters to young friends , illustrating them with quick sketches .
Many of these letters were written to the children of her former governess Annie Carter Moore , particularly to her eldest son Noel who was often ill .
In September 1893 Potter was on holiday at Eastwood in Dunkeld , Perthshire .
She had run out of things to say to Noel and so she told him a story about "four little rabbits whose names were Flopsy , Mopsy , Cottontail and Peter " .
It became one of the most famous children 's letters ever written and the basis of Potter 's future career as a writer-artist-storyteller .
In 1900 , Potter revised her tale about the four little rabbits , and fashioned a dummy book of it - it has been suggested , in imitation of Helen Bannerman 's 1899 bestseller " The Story of Little Black Sambo" .
Unable to find a buyer for the work , she published it for family and friends at her own expense in December 1901 .
It was drawn in black and white with a coloured frontispiece .
Family friend Canon Hardwicke Rawnsley had great faith in Potter 's tale , recast it in didactic verse , and made the rounds of the London publishing houses .
Frederick Warne & Co had previously rejected the tale but , eager to compete in the booming small format children 's book market , reconsidered and accepted the "bunny book " ( as the firm called it ) following the recommendation of their prominent children 's book artist L. Leslie Brooke .
The firm declined Rawnsley 's verse in favour of Potter 's original prose , and Potter agreed to colour her pen and ink illustrations , choosing the then new Hentschel three-colour process to reproduce her watercolours .
On 2 October 1902 " The Tale of Peter Rabbit " was published , and was an immediate success .
It was followed the next year by " The Tale of Squirrel Nutkin " and " The Tailor of Gloucester" , which had also first been written as picture letters to the Moore children .
Working with Norman Warne as her editor , Potter published two or three little books each year : 23 books in all .
The last book in this format was " Cecily Parsley 's Nursery Rhymes " in 1922 , a collection of favourite rhymes .
Although " The Tale of Little Pig Robinson " was not published until 1930 , it had been written much earlier .
Potter continued creating her little books until after the First World War , when her energies were increasingly directed toward her farming , sheep-breeding and land conservation .
The immense popularity of Potter 's books was based on the lively quality of her illustrations , the non-didactic nature of her stories , the depiction of the rural countryside , and the imaginative qualities she lent to her animal characters .
As early as 1903 she made and patented a Peter Rabbit doll .
It was followed by other " spin-off " merchandise over the years , including painting books , board games , wall-paper , figurines , baby blankets and china tea-sets .
All were licensed by Frederick Warne & Co and earned Potter an independent income , as well as immense profits for her publisher .
In 1905 , Potter and Norman Warne became unofficially engaged .
Potter 's parents objected to the match because Warne was "in trade " and thus not socially suitable .
The engagement lasted only one month until Warne died of leukemia at age 37 .
That same year Potter used some of her income and a small inheritance from an aunt to buy Hill Top Farm in Near Sawrey in the English Lake District .
Potter and Warne may have hoped that Hill Top Farm would be their holiday home , but after Warne 's death Potter went ahead with its purchase as she had always wanted to own that farm , and live in " that charming village " .
The tenant farmer John Cannon and his family agreed to stay on to manage the farm for her while she made physical improvements and learned the techniques of fell farming and of raising livestock , including pigs , cows and chickens ; the following year she added sheep.
Realising she needed to protect her boundaries , she sought advice from W.H. Heelis & Son , a local firm of solicitors with offices in nearby Hawkshead .
With William Heelis acting for her she bought contiguous pasture , and in 1909 the Castle Farm across the road from Hill Top Farm .
She visited Hill Top at every opportunity , and her books written during this period ( such as " The Tale of Ginger and Pickles " , about the local shop in Near Sawrey and " The Tale of Mrs. Tittlemouse" , a wood mouse ) reflect her increasing participation in village life and her delight in country living .
Owning and managing these working farms required routine collaboration with the widely respected William Heelis .
By the summer of 1912 Heelis had proposed marriage and Beatrix had accepted ; although she did not immediately tell her parents , who once again disapproved because Heelis was only a country solicitor .
Potter and Heelis were married on 15 October 1913 in London at St Mary Abbots in Kensington .
The couple moved immediately to Near Sawrey , residing at Castle Cottage , the renovated farm house on Castle Farm .
Hill Top remained a working farm but was now remodelled to allow for the tenant family and Potter 's private studio and work shop .
At last her own woman , Potter settled into the partnerships that shaped the rest of her life : her country solicitor husband and his large family , her farms , the Sawrey community and the predictable rounds of country life .
" The Tale of Jemima Puddle-Duck " and " The Tale of Tom Kitten " are representative of Hill Top Farm and of her farming life , and reflect her happiness with her country life .
After Rupert Potter died in 1914 , Potter , now a wealthy woman , found Lindeth Howe , a large house in nearby Windermere where her mother lived until her death in 1931 at the age of 93.
Potter continued to write stories for Frederick Warne & Co and fully participated in country life .
She established a Nursing Trust for local villages , and served on various committees and councils responsible for footpaths and other rural issues .
Beatrix Potter Heelis became keenly interested in the breeding and raising of Herdwick sheep , the indigenous fell sheep , soon after acquiring Hill Top Farm .
In 1923 she bought a former deer park and vast sheep farm in the Troutbeck Valley called Troutbeck Park Farm , restoring its land with thousands of Herdwick sheep.
This established her as one of the major Herdwick sheep farmers in the area .
She was admired by her shepherds and farm managers for her willingness to experiment with the latest biological remedies for the common diseases of sheep , and for her employment of the best shepherds , sheep breeders , and farm managers .
By the late 1920s Potter and her Hill Top farm manager Tom Storey had made a name for their prize-winning Herdwick flock , for which she won many prizes at the local agricultural shows , where she was also often asked to serve as a judge .
In 1942 she was named President-elect of The Herdwick Sheepbreeders ’ Association , the first time a woman had ever been elected to that office , but died before taking office .
Potter had been a disciple of the land conservation and preservation ideals of her long-time friend and mentor , Canon Hardwicke Rawnsley , the first secretary and founding member of the National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty .
She supported the efforts of the National Trust to preserve not just the places of extraordinary beauty but also those heads of valleys and low grazing lands that would be irreparably ruined by development .
She was also an authority on the traditional Lakeland crafts , period furniture and stonework .
She restored and preserved the farms that she bought or managed , making sure that each farm house had in it a piece of antique Lakeland furniture .
Potter was interested in preserving not only the Herdwick sheep , but also the way of life of fell farming .
In 1930 the Heelises became partners with the National Trust in buying and managing the fell farms included in the large Monk Coniston Estate .
The estate was composed of many farms spread over a wide area of north-western Lancashire , including the famously beautiful Tarn Hows .
Potter was the "de facto " estate manager for the Trust for seven years until the National Trust could afford to buy most of the property back from her .
Her stewardship of these farms earned her wide regard , but she was not without her critics .
She was notable in observing the problems of afforestation , preserving the intake grazing lands , and husbanding the quarries and timber on these farms .
All her farms were stocked with Herdwick sheep and frequently with Galloway cattle .
Potter continued to write stories and to draw , although mostly for her own pleasure .
Her books in the late 1920s included the semi-autobiographical " The Fairy Caravan" , a fanciful tale set in her beloved Troutbeck fells .
It was published only in the US during Potter 's lifetime , and not until 1952 in the UK.
" Sister Anne" , Potter 's version of the story of Bluebeard , was written especially for her American readers , but illustrated by Katharine Sturges .
A final folktale , " Wag by Wall" , was published posthumously by " The Horn Book " in 1944 .
Potter was a generous patron of the Girl Guides , whose troops she allowed to make their summer encampments on her lands and whose company she enjoyed as an older woman .
Potter and William Heelis enjoyed a happy marriage of thirty years , continuing their farming and preservation efforts throughout the hard days of the Second World War .
Although they were childless , Potter played an important role in William’s large family , particularly enjoying her relationship with several nieces whom she helped educate and giving comfort and aid to her husband’s brothers and sisters .
Potter died of complications from pneumonia and heart disease on 22 December 1943 at Castle Cottage and her remains were cremated at Carleton Crematorium .
She left nearly all her property to the National Trust , including over of land , sixteen farms , cottages and herds of cattle and Herdwick sheep.
Hers was the largest gift at that time to the National Trust and it enabled the preservation of the lands now included in the Lake District National Park and the continuation of fell farming .
The central office of the National Trust in Swindon was named " Heelis " in 2005 in her memory .
William Heelis continued his stewardship of their properties and of her literary and artistic work for the eighteen months he survived her .
When he died in August 1945 he left the remainder to the National Trust .
Potter left almost all the original illustrations for her books to the National Trust .
The copyright to her stories and merchandise was then given to her publisher Frederick Warne & Co , now a division of the Penguin Group .
On January 1 , 2014 , the copyright expired in the UK and other countries with a 70-years-after-death limit .
Hill Top Farm was opened to the public by the National Trust in 1946 ; her artwork was displayed there until 1985 when it was moved to William Heelis’s former law offices in Hawkshead , also owned by the National Trust as the Beatrix Potter Gallery .
Potter gave her folios of mycological drawings to the Armitt Library and Museum in Ambleside before her death .
" The Tale of Peter Rabbit " is owned by Frederick Warne and Company , " The Tailor of Gloucester " by the Tate Gallery and " The Tale of the Flopsy Bunnies " by the British Museum .
The largest public collection of her letters and drawings is the Leslie Linder Bequest and Leslie Linder Collection at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London .
In the United States , the largest public collections are those in the Special Collections of the Free Library of Philadelphia , and the Lloyd Cotsen Children’s Library at Princeton University .
There are many interpretations of Potter’s literary work , the sources of her art , and her life and times .
These include critical evaluations of her corpus of children 's literature , and Modernist interpretations of Humphrey Carpenter and Katherine Chandler .
Judy Taylor , " That Naughty Rabbit : Beatrix Potter and Peter Rabbit " ( rev.
2002 ) tells the story of the first publication and many editions .
Potter’s country life and her farming has also been widely discussed in the work of Susan Denyer and by other authors in the publications of The National Trust .
Potter 's work as a scientific illustrator and her work in mycology is highlighted in several chapters in Linda Lear , " Beatrix Potter : A Life in Nature" , 2007 ; " Beatrix Potter : The Extraordinary Life of a Victorian Genius" .
In 1971 a ballet film was released , " The Tales of Beatrix Potter" , directed by Reginald Mills .
Set to music by John Lanchbery with choreography by Frederick Ashton and performed in character costume by members of the Royal Ballet and the Royal Opera House orchestra .
The ballet of the same name has been performed by other dance companies around the world .
In 1982 , the BBC produced " The Tale of Beatrix Potter " .
This dramatisation of her life was written by John Hawkesworth and directed by Bill Hayes .
It starred Holly Aird and Penelope Wilton as the young and adult Beatrix respectively .
In 2006 Chris Noonan directed " Miss Potter" , a biopic of Potter’s life focusing on her early career and romance with her editor Norman Warne .
Renée Zellweger and Ewan McGregor play the lead roles .
Potter is also featured in a series of light mysteries called " The Cottage Tales of Beatrix Potter " by Susan Wittig Albert .
The eight books in the series starting with the " Tale of Hill Top Farm " ( 2004 ) deal with her life in the Lake District and the village of Near Sawrey between 1905 and 1913 .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
The northern bobwhite , Virginia quail or ( in its home range ) bobwhite quail ( " Colinus virginianus " ) is a ground-dwelling bird native to the United States , Mexico , and the Caribbean .
It is a member of the group of species known as New World quails ( Odontophoridae ) .
They were initially placed with the Old World quails in the pheasant family ( Phasianidae ) , but are not particularly closely related .
The name "bobwhite " derives from its characteristic whistling call .
Despite its secretive nature , the northern bobwhite is one of the most familiar quails in eastern North America because it is frequently the only quail in its range .
There are 21 subspecies of northern bobwhite , and many of the birds are hunted extensively as game birds .
One subspecies , the masked bobwhite ( " Colinus virginianus ridgewayi" ) , is listed as endangered with wild populations located in Sonora , Mexico , and a reintroduced population in Buenos Aires National Wildlife Refuge in southern Arizona .
This is a moderately-sized quail and is the only small galliform native to eastern North America .
The bobwhite can range from in length with a wingspan .
As indicated by body mass , weights increase in birds found further north , as corresponds to Bergmann 's rule .
In Mexico , northern bobwhites weigh from whereas in the north they average and large males can attain as much as .
Among standard measurements , the wing chord is , the tail is the culmen is and the tarsus is .
It has the typical chunky , rounded shape of a quail .
The bill is short , curved and brown-black in color .
Males have a white throat and brow stripe bordered by black .
The overall rufous plumage has gray mottling on the wings , white scalloped stripes on the flanks , and black scallops on the whitish underparts .
Females are similar but are duller overall and have a buff throat and brow without the black border .
There are twenty-one recognized subspecies in 3 groups .
The northern bobwhite 's diet consists of plants and small bugs , like snails , grasshoppers , and potato beetles .
Plant sources include grass seeds , wild berries , partridge peas , and cultivated grains .
It forages on the ground in open areas with some spots of taller vegetation .
The northern bobwhite can be found year-round in agricultural fields , grassland , open woodland areas , roadsides and wood edges .
Its range covers the southeastern quadrant of the United States from the Great Lakes and southern Minnesota east to Pennsylvania and southern Massachusetts , and extending west to southern Nebraska , Kansas , Oklahoma and all but westernmost Texas .
It is absent from the southern tip of Florida and the highest elevations of the Appalachian Mountains , but occurs in eastern Mexico and in Cuba .
Isolated populations have been introduced in Oregon and Washington .
The northern bobwhite has also been introduced to New Zealand .
The clear whistle "bob-WHITE " or "bob-bob-WHITE " call is very recognizable .
The syllables are slow and widely spaced , rising in pitch a full octave from beginning to end .
Other calls include lisps , peeps , and more rapidly whistled warning calls .
Like most game birds , the northern bobwhite is shy and elusive .
When threatened , it will crouch and freeze , relying on camouflage to stay undetected , but will flush into low flight if closely disturbed .
It is generally solitary or paired early in the year , but family groups are common in the late summer and winter roosts may have two dozen or more birds in a single covey .
The species is generally monogamous , but there is some evidence of polygamy .
Both parents incubate a brood for 23 to 24 days , and the precocial young leave the nest shortly after hatching .
Both parents lead the young birds to food and care for them for 14 to 16 days until their first flight .
A pair may raise one or two broods annually , with 12 to 16 eggs per clutch .
Northern bobwhite were introduced into Italy in 1927 , and are reported in the plains and hills in the northwest of the country .
Other reports from the EU are in France , Spain , and Yugoslavia .
As bobwhites are highly productive and popular aviary subjects , it is reasonable to expect other introductions have been made in other parts of the EU , especially in the UK and Ireland , where game-bird breeding , liberation , and naturalisation are almost national-pastimes .
From 1898 to 1902 , some 1300 birds were imported from America and released in many parts of the North and South Islands , from Northland to Southland .
The bird was briefly on the Nelson game shooting licence , but : " It would seem that the committee was a little too eager in placing these Quail on the licence , or the shooters of the day were over-zealous and greedy in their bag limits , for the Virginian Quail , like the Mountain Quail were soon thing of the past . "
The Taranaki ( Acclimatisation ) Society released a few in 1900 and was confidant that in a year or two they might offer good sport ; two years later , broods were reported and the species was said to be " steadily increasing " ; but after another two years they seemed " to have disappeared " and that was the end of them .
The Otago ( Acclimatisation ) Society imported more in 1948 , but these releases "did no good " .
After 1923 , no more genuinely wild birds were sighted until 1952 , when a small population was found North-West of Wairoa in the Ruapapa Road area .
Since then bobwhite have been found at several localities around Waikaremoana , in farmland , open bush and along roadsides .
More birds have been imported into New Zealand by private individuals since the 1990s and a healthy captive population is now held by backyard aviculturalists and have been found to be easily cared for , bred , and are popular for their " song " and "good-looks " .
A larger proportion of the national captive population belong to a few game preserves and game bird breeders .
Though the birds would be self-sustaining in the wild if they were protected ; it is tricky to guess what the effect of an annual population subsidy and hunting has on any of the original populations from the Acclimatisation Society releases .
It would be fair to suggest most birds in the wild are no more than one generation from captive stock .
An albino hen was present in a covey in Bayview , Hawkes Bay for a couple of seasons sometime around 2000 .
Bobwhites are popular throughout the world , with healthy captive populations everywhere where bird-keeping is enjoyed .
Certain countries/states require permits and record keeping , as the possibility that an introduced population may compete with or spread diseases with native quail is a real threat .
Bobwhites are generally compatible with most parrots , softbills and doves .
This species should , however , be the only ground-dwelling species in the aviary .
Most individuals will do little damage to finches , but one should watch that nests are not being crushed when the species perches at night .
Single pairs are preferred , unless the birds have been raised together as a group since they were chicks .
Some fighting will occur between cocks at breeding time .
One cock may be capable of servicing several hens at once , but the fertility seems to be highest in the eggs from the "preferred " hen .
Aviary style is a compromise between what is tolerated by the bird and what is best for the bird .
Open parrot-style type aviaries may be used , but some birds will remain flighty and shy in this situation .
In a planted aviary , this species will generally settle down to become quite tame and confiding .
Parents with chicks will roost on the ground , forming a circular arrangement , with heads facing outwards .
In the early morning and late afternoon , the cock will utter its call , which , although not loud , carries well and may offend noise-sensitive neighbors .
Most breeding facilities keep birds in breeding groups , on wire up off the ground .
This keeps the birds clean and generally avoids diseases and parasites which can devastate a covey .
Cages with mesh floors for pairs and trios are also employed , but usually where there is a photo-period manipulation to keep birds breeding through winter .
In the wild the bobwhite feeds on a variety of seeds of weeds , grasses , as well as insects .
These are generally collected on the ground or from low foliage .
Birds in the aviary are easily catered for with a commercial small seed mix ( finch , budgerigar , or small parrot mix ) when supplemented with greenfeed .
Live food is not usually necessary for breeding , but will be ravenously accepted .
High protein foods such as chicken grower crumble are more convenient to supply and will be useful for the stimulation of breeding birds .
Extra calcium is required , especially by laying hens ; it can be supplied in the form of shell grit , or cuttlefish bone .
In an open aviary hens will lay all over the show if a nesting site and privacy are not provided .
Hens that do this may lay upwards of 80 eggs in a season which can be taken for artificial incubation - and chicks hand raised .
Otherwise hens with nesting cover , that do make a nest ( on the ground ) will build up 8–25 eggs in a clutch , with eggs being laid daily .
Some captive bobwhite hybrids recorded are between blue quail (scaled quail ) , Gambel 's quail , California quail , mountain quail and it has long been suggested that there are Japanese quail hybrids being bred commercially ; there is a distinct lack of photographic proof to substantiate this .
Several mutations have long been established , including Californian Jumbo , Wisconsin Jumbo , Northern Giant , Albino , Snowflake , Blonde , Fawn , Barred , Silver , and Red .
The Central American spot-bellied bobwhite looks very similar , but lacks black facial coloration .
The Asian rain quail is larger in size and has a black breast .
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
The Boeing 747 is a wide-body commercial airliner and cargo transport aircraft , often referred to by its original nickname , " Jumbo Jet" , or " Queen of the Skies " .
It is among the world 's most recognizable aircraft and was the first wide-body produced .
Manufactured by Boeing 's Commercial Airplane unit in the United States , the original version of the 747 was two and a half times larger in capacity than the Boeing 707 , one of the common large commercial aircraft of the 1960s .
First flown commercially in 1970 , the 747 held the passenger capacity record for 37 years .
The four-engine 747 uses a double deck configuration for part of its length .
It is available in passenger , freighter and other versions .
Boeing designed the 747 's hump-like upper deck to serve as a first class lounge or ( as is the general rule today ) extra seating , and to allow the aircraft to be easily converted to a cargo carrier by removing seats and installing a front cargo door .
Boeing did so because the company expected supersonic airliners ( development of which was announced in the early 1960s ) to render the 747 and other subsonic airliners obsolete , while the demand for subsonic cargo aircraft would be robust well into the future .
The 747 was expected to become obsolete after 400 were sold , but it exceeded critics ' expectations with production passing the 1,000 mark in 1993 .
By April 2014 , 1,487 aircraft had been built , with 51 of the 747-8 variants remaining on order .
The 747-400 , the most common passenger version in service , is among the fastest airliners in service with a high-subsonic cruise speed of Mach 0.85–0.855
It has an intercontinental range of 7,260 nautical miles (8,350 mi or 13,450 km ) .
The 747-400 passenger version can accommodate 416 passengers in a typical three-class layout , 524 passengers in a typical two-class layout , or 660 passengers in a high density one-class configuration .
The newest version of the aircraft , the 747-8 , is in production and received certification in 2011 .
Deliveries of the 747-8F freighter version to launch customer Cargolux began in October 2011 ; deliveries of the 747-8I passenger version to Lufthansa began in May 2012 .
The 747 is to be replaced by the Boeing Y3 ( part of the Boeing Yellowstone Project ) in the future .
In 1963 , the United States Air Force started a series of study projects on a very large strategic transport aircraft .
Although the C-141 Starlifter was being introduced , they believed that a much larger and more capable aircraft was needed , especially the capability to carry outsized cargo that would not fit in any existing aircraft .
These studies led to initial requirements for the CX-Heavy Logistics System ( CX-HLS ) in March 1964 for an aircraft with a load capacity of and a speed of Mach 0.75 ( ) , and an unrefueled range of with a payload of .
The payload bay had to be wide by high and long with access through doors at the front and rear .
Featuring only four engines , the design also required new engine designs with greatly increased power and better fuel economy .
On May 18 , 1964 , airframe proposals arrived from Boeing , Douglas , General Dynamics , Lockheed and Martin Marietta ; while engine proposals were submitted by General Electric , Curtiss-Wright , and Pratt & Whitney .
After a downselect , Boeing , Douglas and Lockheed were given additional study contracts for the airframe , along with General Electric and Pratt & Whitney for the engines .
All three of the airframe proposals shared a number of features .
As the CX-HLS needed to be able to be loaded from the front , a door had to be included where the cockpit usually was .
All of the companies solved this problem by moving the cockpit above the cargo area ; Douglas had a small "pod " just forward and above the wing , Lockheed used a long " spine " running the length of the aircraft with the wing spar passing through it , while Boeing blended the two , with a longer pod that ran from just behind the nose to just behind the wing .
In 1965 Lockheed 's aircraft design and General Electric 's engine design were selected for the new C-5 Galaxy transport , which was the largest military aircraft in the world at the time .
The nose door and raised cockpit concepts would be carried over to the design of the 747 .
The 747 was conceived while air travel was increasing in the 1960s .
The era of commercial jet transportation , led by the enormous popularity of the Boeing 707 and Douglas DC-8 , had revolutionized long-distance travel .
Even before it lost the CX-HLS contract , Boeing was pressed by Juan Trippe , president of Pan American World Airways ( Pan Am) , one of their most important airline customers , to build a passenger aircraft more than twice the size of the 707 .
During this time , airport congestion , worsened by increasing numbers of passengers carried on relatively small aircraft , became a problem that Trippe thought could be addressed by a large new aircraft .
In 1965 , Joe Sutter was transferred from Boeing 's 737 development team to manage the design studies for a new airliner , already assigned the model number 747 .
Sutter initiated a design study with Pan Am and other airlines , to better understand their requirements .
At the time , it was widely thought that the 747 would eventually be superseded by supersonic transport aircraft .
Boeing responded by designing the 747 so that it could be adapted easily to carry freight and remain in production even if sales of the passenger version declined .
In the freighter role , the clear need was to support the containerized shipping methodologies that were being widely introduced at about the same time .
Standard containers are square at the front ( slightly higher due to attachment points ) and available in lengths .
This meant that it would be possible to support a 2-wide 2-high stack of containers two or three ranks deep with a fuselage size similar to the earlier CX-HLS project .
In April 1966 , Pan Am ordered 25 747-100 aircraft for US$ 525 million .
During the ceremonial 747 contract-signing banquet in Seattle on Boeing 's 50th Anniversary , Juan Trippe predicted that the 747 would be " ... a great weapon for peace , competing with intercontinental missiles for mankind 's destiny" , according to Malcolm T. Stamper , who led the 747 program .
As launch customer , and because of its early involvement before placing a formal order , Pan Am was able to influence the design and development of the 747 to an extent unmatched by a single airline before or since .
Ultimately , the high-winged CX-HLS Boeing design was not used for the 747 , although technologies developed for their bid had an influence .
The original design included a full-length double-deck fuselage with eight-across seating and two aisles on the lower deck and seven-across seating and two aisles on the upper deck .
However , concern over evacuation routes and limited cargo-carrying capability caused this idea to be scrapped in early 1966 in favor of a wider single deck design .
The cockpit was , therefore , placed on a shortened upper deck so that a freight-loading door could be included in the nose cone ; this design feature produced the 747 's distinctive "bulge " .
In early models it was not clear what to do with the small space in the pod behind the cockpit , and this was initially specified as a "lounge " area with no permanent seating .
One of the principal technologies that enabled an aircraft as large as the 747 to be conceived was the high-bypass turbofan engine .
The engine technology was thought to be capable of delivering double the power of the earlier turbojets while consuming a third less fuel .
General Electric had pioneered the concept but was committed to developing the engine for the C-5 Galaxy and did not enter the commercial market until later .
Pratt & Whitney was also working on the same principle and , by late 1966 , Boeing , Pan Am and Pratt & Whitney agreed to develop a new engine , designated the JT9D to power the 747 .
The project was designed with a new methodology called fault tree analysis , which allowed the effects of a failure of a single part to be studied to determine its impact on other systems .
To address concerns about safety and flyability , the 747 's design included structural redundancy , redundant hydraulic systems , quadruple main landing gear and dual control surfaces .
Additionally , some of the most advanced high-lift devices used in the industry were included in the new design , to allow it to operate from existing airports .
These included leading edge flaps running almost the entire length of the wing , as well as complex three-part slotted flaps along the rear .
The wing 's complex three-part flaps increase wing area by 21 percent and lift by 90 percent when fully deployed compared to their non-deployed configuration .
Boeing agreed to deliver the first 747 to Pan Am by the end of 1969 .
The delivery date left 28 months to design the aircraft , which was two-thirds of the normal time .
The schedule was so fast paced that the people who worked on it were given the nickname " The Incredibles " .
Developing the aircraft was such a technical and financial challenge that management was said to have "bet the company " when it started the project .
As Boeing did not have a plant large enough to assemble the giant airliner , they chose to build a new plant .
The company considered locations in about 50 cities , and eventually decided to build the new plant some 30 miles ( 48 km ) north of Seattle on a site adjoining a military base at Paine Field near Everett , Washington .
Developing the 747 had been a major challenge , and building its assembly plant was also a huge undertaking .
Boeing president William M. Allen asked Malcolm T. Stamper , then head of the company 's turbine division , to oversee construction of the Everett factory and to start production of the 747 .
To level the site , more than of earth had to be moved .
Time was so short that the 747 's full-scale mock-up was built before the factory roof above it was finished .
The plant is the largest building by volume ever built , and has been substantially expanded several times to permit construction of other models of Boeing wide-body commercial jets .
Before the first 747 was fully assembled , testing began on many components and systems .
One important test involved the evacuation of 560 volunteers from a cabin mock-up via the aircraft 's emergency chutes .
The first full-scale evacuation took two and a half minutes instead of the maximum of 90 seconds mandated by the Federal Aviation Administration ( FAA ) , and several volunteers were injured .
Subsequent test evacuations achieved the 90-second goal but caused more injuries .
Most problematic was evacuation from the aircraft 's upper deck ; instead of using a conventional slide , volunteer passengers escaped by using a harness attached to a reel .
Tests also involved taxiing such a large aircraft .
Boeing built an unusual training device known as " Waddell 's Wagon " ( named for a 747 test pilot , Jack Waddell ) that consisted of a mock-up cockpit mounted on the roof of a truck .
While the first 747s were still being built , the device allowed pilots to practice taxi maneuvers from a high upper-deck position .
On September 30 , 1968 , the first 747 was rolled out of the Everett assembly building before the world 's press and representatives of the 26 airlines that had ordered the airliner .
Over the following months , preparations were made for the first flight , which took place on February 9 , 1969 , with test pilots Jack Waddell and Brien Wygle at the controls and Jess Wallick at the flight engineer 's station .
Despite a minor problem with one of the flaps , the flight confirmed that the 747 handled extremely well .
The 747 was found to be largely immune to " Dutch roll" , a phenomenon that had been a major hazard to the early swept-wing jets .
During later stages of the flight test program , flutter testing showed that the wings suffered oscillation under certain conditions .
This difficulty was partly solved by reducing the stiffness of some wing components .
However , a particularly severe high-speed flutter problem was solved only by inserting depleted uranium counterweights as ballast in the outboard engine nacelles of the early 747s .
This measure caused anxiety when these aircraft crashed , as did China Airlines Flight 358 at Wanli in 1991 and El Al Flight 1862 at Amsterdam in 1992 which had of uranium in the tailplane .
The flight test program was hampered by problems with the 747 's JT9D engines .
Difficulties included engine stalls caused by rapid movements of the throttles and distortion of the turbine casings after a short period of service .
The problems delayed 747 deliveries for several months and stranded up to 20 aircraft at the Everett plant while they awaited engine installation .
The program was further delayed when one of the five test aircraft suffered serious damage during a landing attempt at Renton Municipal Airport , site of the company 's Renton factory .
On December 13 , 1969 the test aircraft was being taken to have its test equipment removed and a cabin installed when pilot Ralph C. Cokely undershot the airport 's short runway .
The 747 's right , outer landing gear was torn off and two engine nacelles were damaged .
However , these difficulties did not prevent Boeing from taking one of the test aircraft to the 28th Paris Air Show in mid-1969 , where it was displayed to the general public for the first time .
The 747 achieved its FAA airworthiness certificate in December 1969 , making it ready for introduction into service .
The huge cost of developing the 747 and building the Everett factory meant that Boeing had to borrow heavily from a banking syndicate .
During the final months before delivery of the first aircraft , the company had to repeatedly request additional funding to complete the project .
Had this been refused , Boeing 's survival would have been threatened .
The company 's debt exceeded $ 2 billion , with the $ 1.2 billion owed to the banks setting a record for all companies .
Allen later said , " It was really too large a project for us . "
Ultimately , the gamble succeeded , and Boeing held a monopoly in very large passenger aircraft production for many years .
On January 15 , 1970 , First Lady of the United States Pat Nixon christened Pan Am 's first 747 , " Clipper Victor" , at Dulles International Airport ( later renamed Washington Dulles International Airport ) in the presence of Pan Am chairman Najeeb Halaby .
Instead of champagne , red , white , and blue water was sprayed on the aircraft .
The 747 entered service on January 22 , 1970 , on Pan Am 's New York–London route ; the flight had been planned for the evening of January 21 , but engine overheating made the original aircraft unusable .
Finding a substitute delayed the flight by more than six hours to the following day .
The 747 enjoyed a fairly smooth introduction into service , overcoming concerns that some airports would not be able to accommodate an aircraft that large .
Although technical problems occurred , they were relatively minor and quickly solved .
After the aircraft 's introduction with Pan Am , other airlines that had bought the 747 to stay competitive began to put their own 747s into service .
Boeing estimated that half of the early 747 sales were to airlines desiring the aircraft 's long range rather than its payload capacity .
While the 747 had the lowest potential operating cost per seat , this could only be achieved when the aircraft was fully loaded ; costs per seat increased rapidly as occupancy declined .
A moderately loaded 747 , one with only 70 percent of its seats occupied , used more than 95 percent of the fuel needed by a fully occupied 747 .
For the year and a half after September 1970 it only sold two 747s in the world , and did not sell any to an American carrier for almost three years .
When economic problems in the United States and other countries after the 1973 oil crisis led to reduced passenger traffic , several airlines found they did not have enough passengers to fly the 747 economically , and they replaced them with the smaller and recently introduced McDonnell Douglas DC-10 and Lockheed L-1011 TriStar trijet wide bodies ( and later the 767 and A300 twinjets ) .
Having tried replacing coach seats on its 747s with piano bars in an attempt to attract more customers , American Airlines eventually relegated its 747s to cargo service and in 1983 exchanged them with Pan Am for smaller aircraft ; Delta Air Lines also removed its 747s from service after several years .
Delta would later merge with Northwest Airlines , which operates 747s .
International flights that bypassed traditional hub airports and landed at smaller cities became more common throughout the 1980s , and this eroded the 747 's original market .
However , many international carriers continued to use the 747 on Pacific routes .
In Japan , 747s on domestic routes are configured to carry close to the maximum passenger capacity .
After the initial 747-100 model , Boeing developed the , a higher maximum takeoff weight ( MTOW) variant , and the ( Short Range ) , with higher passenger capacity .
Increased maximum takeoff weight allows aircraft to carry more fuel and have longer range .
The model followed in 1971 , featuring more powerful engines and a higher MTOW.
Passenger , freighter and combination passenger-freighter versions of the were produced .
The shortened 747SP ( special performance ) with a longer range was also developed , and entered service in 1976 .
The 747 line was further developed with the launch of the 747-300 in 1980 .
The 300 series resulted from Boeing studies to increase the seating capacity of the 747 , during which modifications such as fuselage plugs and extending the upper deck over the entire length of the fuselage were rejected .
The first 747-300 , completed in 1983 , included a stretched upper deck , increased cruise speed , and increased seating capacity .
The -300 variant was previously designated 747SUD for stretched upper deck , then 747-200 SUD , followed by 747EUD , before the 747-300 designation was used .
Passenger , short range and combination freighter-passenger versions of the 300 series were produced .
In 1985 , development of the longer range 747-400 began .
The variant had a new glass cockpit , which allowed for a cockpit crew of two instead of three , new engines , lighter construction materials , and a redesigned interior .
Development cost soared , and production delays occurred as new technologies were incorporated at the request of airlines .
Insufficient workforce experience and reliance on overtime contributed to early production problems on the 747-400 .
In 1991 , a record-breaking 1,087 passengers were airlifted aboard a 747 to Israel as part of Operation Solomon .
The 747 remained the heaviest commercial aircraft in regular service until the debut of the Antonov An-124 Ruslan in 1982 ; variants of the 747-400 would surpass the An-124 's weight in 2000 .
The Antonov An-225 " Mriya " cargo transport , which debuted in 1988 , remains the world 's largest aircraft by several measures ( including the most accepted measures of maximum takeoff weight and length ) ; one aircraft has been completed and is in service .
The Hughes H-4 Hercules is the largest aircraft by wingspan , but it only completed a single flight .
Since the arrival of the 747-400 , several stretching schemes for the 747 have been proposed .
Boeing announced the larger 747-500X and preliminary designs in 1996 .
The new variants would have cost more than US$ 5 billion to develop , and interest was not sufficient to launch the program .
In 2000 , Boeing offered the more modest 747X and 747X stretch derivatives as alternatives to the Airbus A3XX .
However , the 747X family was unable to attract enough interest to enter production .
A year later , Boeing switched from the 747X studies to pursue the Sonic Cruiser , and after the Sonic Cruiser program was put on hold , the 787 Dreamliner .
Some of the ideas developed for the 747X were used on the 747-400ER , a longer range variant of the 747-400 .
After several variants were proposed but later abandoned , some industry observers became skeptical of new aircraft proposals from Boeing .
However , in early 2004 , Boeing announced tentative plans for the 747 Advanced that were eventually adopted .
Similar in nature to the 747-X , the stretched 747 Advanced used technology from the 787 to modernize the design and its systems .
The 747 remained the largest passenger airliner in service until the Airbus A380 began airline service in 2007 .
On November 14 , 2005 , Boeing announced it was launching the 747 Advanced as the Boeing 747-8.
, most orders of the 747-8 have been for the freighter variant .
On February 8 , 2010 , the 747-8 Freighter made its maiden flight .
The first scheduled delivery of the 747-8 went to Cargolux in 2011 .
Eventually , the 747 may be replaced in Boeing 's lineup by a new design named " Y3" .
The Boeing 747 is a large , wide-body ( two-aisle ) airliner with four wing-mounted engines .
The wings have a high sweep angle of 37.5 degrees for a fast , efficient cruise of Mach 0.84 to 0.88 , depending on the variant .
The sweep also reduces the wingspan , allowing the 747 to use existing hangars .
Seating capacity is more than 366 with a 3–4–3 seat arrangement ( a cross section of 3 seats , an aisle , 4 seats , another aisle , and 3 seats ) in economy class and a 2–3–2 arrangement in first class on the main deck .
The upper deck has a 3–3 seat arrangement in economy class and a 2–2 arrangement in first class .
Raised above the main deck , the cockpit creates a hump .
The raised cockpit allows front loading of cargo on freight variants .
The upper deck behind the cockpit provides space for a lounge or extra seating .
The " stretched upper deck " became available as an option on the 747-100B variant and later as standard on the 747-300 .
The 747 cockpit roof section also has an escape hatch from which crew can exit in the event of an emergency if they cannot exit through the cabin .
The 747 's maximum takeoff weight ranges from 735,000 pounds ( 333,400 kg ) for the −100 to 970,000 lb ( 439,985 kg ) for the −8 .
Its range has increased from 5,300 nautical miles (6,100 mi , 9,800 km ) on the −100 to 8,000 nmi (9,200 mi , 14,815 km ) on the −8I.
The 747 has multiple structural redundancy including four redundant hydraulic systems and four main landing gears with four wheels each , which provide a good spread of support on the ground and safety in case of tire blow-outs .
The redundant main gear allows for landing on two opposing landing gears if the others do not function properly .
In addition , the 747 has split control surfaces and was designed with sophisticated triple-slotted flaps that minimize landing speeds and allow the 747 to use standard-length runways .
For transportation of spare engines , 747s can accommodate a non-functioning fifth-pod engine under the port wing of the aircraft between the inner functioning engine and the fuselage .
The 747-100 was the original variant launched in 1966 .
The 747-200 soon followed , with its launch in 1968 .
The 747-300 was launched in 1980 and was followed by the 747-400 in 1985 .
Several versions of each variant have been produced , and many of the early variants were in production simultaneously .
The International Civil Aviation Organization ( ICAO ) classifies variants using a shortened code formed by combining the model number and the variant designator ( e .g .
The first 747-100s were built with six upper deck windows ( three per side ) to accommodate upstairs lounge areas .
Later , as airlines began to use the upper deck for premium passenger seating instead of lounge space , Boeing offered a ten-window upper deck as an option .
Some early −100s were retrofitted with the new configuration .
The −100 was equipped with Pratt & Whitney JT9D-3A engines .
No freighter version of this model was developed , but many 747-100s have been converted into freighters .
Responding to requests from Japanese airlines for a high-capacity aircraft to serve domestic routes between major cities , Boeing developed the 747SR as a short range variant of the 747-100 with lower fuel capacity and greater payload capability .
With increased economy class seating , up to 498 passengers could be carried in early versions and more than 550 in later models .
The 747SR had an economic design life objective of 52,000 flights during 20 years of airline operation , compared to 24,600 flights in 20 years for the standard 747 .
The initial 747SR model , the −100SR , had a strengthened body structure and landing gear to accommodate the added stress accumulated from a greater number of takeoffs and landings .
Extra structural support was built into the wings , fuselage , and the landing gear along with a 20 percent reduction in fuel capacity .
The initial order for the −100SR , four aircraft for Japan Air Lines ( JAL , later Japan Airlines ) , was announced on October 30 , 1972 ; rollout occurred on August 3 , 1973 , and the first flight took place on August 31 , 1973 .
The type was certified by the FAA on September 26 , 1973 , with the first delivery on the same day .
The −100SR entered service with JAL , the type 's sole customer , on October 7 , 1973 , and typically operated Japanese domestic flights .
Seven −100SRs were built from 1973 and 1975 , each with a MTOW and Pratt & Whitney JT9D-7A engines derated to of thrust .
Following the −100SR , Boeing produced the −100BSR , a 747SR variant with increased takeoff weight capability .
Debuting in 1978 , the −100BSR also incorporated structural modifications for a high cycle-to-flying hour ratio ; a related standard −100B model debuted in 1979 .
The −100BSR first flew on November 3 , 1978 , with first delivery to All Nippon Airways ( ANA ) on December 21 , 1978 .
A total of 20 −100BSRs were produced for ANA and JAL .
The −100BSR had a 600,000 lb MTOW and was powered by the same JT9D-7A engines used on the −100SR.
ANA operated the type on domestic Japanese routes with 455 or 456 seats until retiring its last aircraft on March 10 , 2006 .
In 1986 , two −100BSR SUD models , featuring the stretched upper deck ( SUD) of the −300 , were produced for JAL .
The type 's maiden flight occurred on February 26 , 1986 , with FAA certification and first delivery on March 24 , 1986 .
JAL operated the −100BSR SUD with 563 seats on domestic routes until their retirement in the third quarter of 2006 .
While only two −100BSR SUDs were produced , in theory , standard −100Bs can be modified to the SUD certification .
Overall , 29 747SRs were built , consists of seven −100SRs , twenty −100BSRs , and two −100BSR SUDs .
The 747-100B model was developed from the −100SR , using its stronger airframe and landing gear design .
The type had an increased fuel capacity of , allowing for a range with a typical 452-passenger payload , and an increased MTOW of was offered .
The first −100B order , one aircraft for Iran Air , was announced on June 1 , 1978 .
This aircraft first flew on June 20 , 1979 , received FAA certification on August 1 , 1979 , and was delivered the next day .
Nine −100Bs were built , one for Iran Air and eight for Saudi Arabian Airlines .
Unlike the original −100 , the −100B was offered with Pratt & Whitney JT9D-7A , General Electric CF6-50 , or Rolls-Royce RB211-524 engines .
However , only RB211-524 ( Saudia ) and JT9D-7A ( Iran Air ) engines were ordered .
The development of the 747SP stemmed from a joint request between Pan American World Airways and Iran Air , who were looking for a high-capacity airliner with enough range to cover Pan Am 's New York–Middle Eastern routes and Iran Air 's planned Tehran–New York route .
The Tehran–New York route , when launched , was the longest non-stop commercial flight in the world .
Fuselage sections were eliminated fore and aft of the wing , and the center section of the fuselage was redesigned to fit mating fuselage sections .
The SP 's flaps used a simplified single-slotted configuration .
The 747SP , compared to earlier variants , had a tapering of the aft upper fuselage into the empennage , a double-hinged rudder , and longer vertical and horizontal stabilizers .
Power was provided by Pratt & Whitney JT9D-7( A/F/J/FW) or Rolls-Royce RB211-524 engines .
The 747SP was granted a supplemental certificate on February 4 , 1976 and entered service with launch customer Pan Am and Iran Air that same year .
The aircraft was chosen by airlines wishing to serve major airports with short runways .
A total of 45 747SPs were built , with the 44th 747SP delivered on August 30 , 1982 .
In 1987 , Boeing re-opened the 747SP production line after five years to build one last 747SP for an order by the United Arab Emirates government .
In addition to airline use , one 747SP was modified for NASA Dryden Flight Research Center 's SOFIA experiment .
While the 747-100 powered by Pratt & Whitney JT9D-3A engines offered enough payload and range for US domestic operations , it was marginal for long international route sectors .
The demand for longer range aircraft with increased payload quickly led to the improved −200 , which featured more powerful engines , increased MTOW , and greater range than the −100 .
A few early −200s retained the three-window configuration of the −100 on the upper deck , but most were built with a ten-window configuration on each side .
The 747-200 was produced in passenger ( −200B) , freighter ( −200F) , convertible ( −200C) , and combi ( −200M ) versions .
The 747-200B was the basic passenger version , with increased fuel capacity and more powerful engines ; it entered service in February 1971 .
In its first three years of production , the −200 was equipped with Pratt & Whitney JT9D-7 engines ( initially the only engine available ) .
Range with a full passenger load started at over and increased to with later engines .
Most −200Bs had an internally stretched upper deck , allowing for up to 16 passenger seats .
The freighter model , the 747-200F , could be fitted with or without a side cargo door , and had a capacity of 105 tons ( 95.3 tonnes ) and an MTOW of up to 833,000 lb ( 378,000 kg ) .
The convertible version , the 747-200C , could be converted between a passenger and a freighter or used in mixed configurations , and featured removable seats and a nose cargo door .
The −200C could also be fitted with an optional side cargo door on the main deck .
The combi model , the 747-200M , could carry freight in the rear section of the main deck via a side cargo door .
A removable partition on the main deck separated the cargo area at the rear from the passengers at the front .
The −200M could carry up to 238 passengers in a three-class configuration with cargo carried on the main deck .
The model was also known as the 747-200 Combi .
As on the −100 , a stretched upper deck ( SUD) modification was later offered .
A total of 10 converted 747-200s were operated by KLM.
Union des Transports Aériens ( UTA ) also had two of these aircraft converted .
After launching the −200 with Pratt & Whitney JT9D-7 engines , on August 1 , 1972 Boeing announced that it had reached an agreement with General Electric to certify the 747 with CF6-50 series engines to increase the aircraft 's market potential .
Rolls-Royce followed 747 engine production with a launch order from British Airways for four aircraft .
The option of RB211-524B engines was announced on June 17 , 1975 .
The −200 was the first 747 to provide a choice of powerplant from the three major engine manufacturers .
A total of 393 of the 747-200 versions had been built when production ended in 1991 .
Of these , 225 were −200s , 73 were −200F , 13 were −200C , 78 were −200M , and 4 were military .
Many 747-200s remain in operation , although most large carriers have retired them from their fleets and sold them to smaller operators .
Large carriers have sped up fleet retirement following the September 11 attacks and the subsequent drop in demand for air travel , scrapping some or turning others into freighters .
The 747-300 features a longer upper deck than the −200 .
The stretched upper deck has two emergency exit doors and is the most visible difference between the −300 and previous models .
Before being made standard on the 747-300 , the stretched upper deck was previously offered as a retrofit , and first appeared on two Japanese 747-100SR aircraft .
The −300 introduced a new straight stairway to the upper deck , instead of a spiral staircase on earlier variants , which creates room above and below for more seats .
Minor aerodynamic changes allowed the −300 's cruise speed to reach Mach 0.85 compared with Mach 0.84 on the −200 and −100 models , while retaining the same takeoff weight .
The −300 could be equipped with the same Pratt & Whitney and Rolls-Royce powerplants as on the −200 , as well as updated General Electric CF6-80C2B1 engines .
Swissair placed the first order for the 747-300 on June 11 , 1980 .
The variant revived the 747-300 designation , which had been previously used on a design study that did not reach production .
The 747-300 first flew on October 5 , 1982 , and the type 's first delivery went to Swissair on March 23 , 1983 .
Besides the passenger model , two other versions ( −300M , −300SR ) were produced .
The 747-300M features cargo capacity on the rear portion of the main deck , similar to the −200M , but with the stretched upper deck it can carry more passengers .
The 747-300SR , a short range , high-capacity domestic model , was produced for Japanese markets ; Japan Airlines operated the type with more than 600 seats on the Okinawa–Tokyo route and elsewhere .
No production freighter version of the 747-300 was built , but Boeing began modifications of used passenger −300 models into freighters in 2000 .
A total of 81 aircraft of the 747-300 series were delivered , 56 for passenger use , 21 −300M and 4 −300SR versions .
In 1985 , just two years after the −300 entered service , the type was superseded by the announcement of the more advanced 747-400 .
The last 747-300 was delivered in September 1990 to Sabena .
While some −300 customers continued operating the type , several large carriers replaced their 747-300s with 747-400s .
Air France , Air India , Pakistan International Airlines , and Qantas were some of the last major carriers to operate the 747-300 .
On December 29 , 2008 , Qantas flew its last scheduled 747-300 service , operating from Melbourne to Los Angeles via Auckland .
The 747-400 is an improved model with increased range .
It has wingtip extensions of and winglets of , which improve the type 's fuel efficiency by four percent compared to previous 747 versions .
The 747-400 introduced a new glass cockpit designed for a flight crew of two instead of three , with a reduction in the number of dials , gauges and knobs from 971 to 365 through the use of electronics .
The type also features tail fuel tanks , revised engines , and a new interior .
The longer range has been used by some airlines to bypass traditional fuel stops , such as Anchorage .
Powerplants include the Pratt & Whitney PW4062 , General Electric CF6-80C2 , and Rolls-Royce RB211-524 .
The was offered in passenger ( −400 ) , freighter ( −400F) , combi ( −400M) , domestic ( −400D) , extended range passenger ( −400ER ) , and extended range freighter ( −400ERF ) versions .
Passenger versions retain the same upper deck as the , while the freighter version does not have an extended upper deck .
The 747-400D was built for short range operations and does not include winglets , but can be retrofitted with them .
Cruising speed is up to Mach 0.855 on different versions of the 747-400 .
The passenger version first entered service in February 1989 with launch customer Northwest Airlines on the Minneapolis to Phoenix route .
The combi version entered service in September 1989 with KLM , while the freighter version entered service in November 1993 with Cargolux .
The 747-400ERF entered service with Air France in October 2002 , while the 747-400ER entered service with Qantas , its sole customer , in November 2002 .
In January 2004 , Boeing and Cathay Pacific launched the Boeing 747-400 Special Freighter program , later referred to as the Boeing Converted Freighter (BCF) , to modify passenger 747-400s for cargo use .
The first 747-400BCF was redelivered in December 2005 .
In March 2007 , Boeing announced that it had no plans to produce further passenger versions of the −400 .
However , orders for 36 −400F and −400ERF freighters were already in place at the time of the announcement .
The last passenger version of the 747-400 was delivered in April 2005 to China Airlines .
Some of the last built 747-400s were delivered with Dreamliner livery along with the modern Signature interior from the Boeing 777 .
A total of 694 of the 747-400 series aircraft were delivered .
At various times , the largest 747-400 operator has included Singapore Airlines , Japan Airlines , and British Airways with 57 as of June 2013 .
The 747-400 Dreamlifter (originally called the 747 Large Cargo Freighter or LC F ) is a Boeing-designed modification of existing 747-400s to a larger configuration to ferry 787 Dreamliner sub-assemblies .
Evergreen Aviation Technologies Corporation of Taiwan was contracted to complete modifications of 747-400s into Dreamlifters in Taoyuan .
The aircraft flew for the first time on September 9 , 2006 in a test flight .
Modification of four aircraft was completed by February 2010 .
The Dreamlifters have been placed into service transporting sub-assemblies for the 787 program to the Boeing plant in Everett , Washington , for final assembly .
The aircraft is certified to carry only essential crew and not passengers .
Boeing announced a new 747 variant , the 747-8 , on November 14 , 2005 .
Referred to as the 747 Advanced prior to its launch , the 747-8 uses the same engine and cockpit technology as the 787 , hence the use of the " 8" .
The variant is designed to be quieter , more economical , and more environmentally friendly .
The 747-8 's fuselage is lengthened from 232 to 251 feet ( 70.8 to 76.4 m ) , marking the first stretch variant of the aircraft .
Power is supplied by General Electric GEnx-2B67 engines .
The 747-8 Freighter , or 747-8F , is derived from the 747-400ERF.
The variant has 16 percent more payload capacity than its predecessor , allowing it to carry seven additional standard air cargo containers , with a maximum payload capacity of 154 tons ( 140 tonnes ) of cargo .
As on previous 747 freighters , the 747-8F features an overhead nose-door and a side-door on the main deck plus a side-door on the lower deck ( "belly " ) to aid loading and unloading .
The 747-8F made its maiden flight on February 8 , 2010 .
The variant received its amended type certificate jointly from the FAA and the European Aviation Safety Agency ( EASA ) on August 19 , 2011 .
The −8F was first delivered to Cargolux on October 12 , 2011 .
The passenger version , named 747-8 Intercontinental or 747-8I , is designed to carry up to 467 passengers in a 3-class configuration and fly more than at Mach 0.855 .
As a derivative of the already common 747-400 , the 747-8 has the economic benefit of similar training and interchangeable parts .
The type 's first test flight occurred on March 20 , 2011 .
At its introduction , the 747-8 surpassed the Airbus A340-600 as the world 's longest airliner .
The first −8 I was delivered in May 2012 to Lufthansa .
The 747-8 has received 120 total orders , including 69 for the −8F and 51 for the −8I , as of the end of April 2014 .
Boeing has studied a number of 747 variants that have not gone beyond the concept stage .
During the late 1960s and early 1970s , Boeing studied the development of a shorter 747 with three engines , to compete with the smaller L-1011 TriStar and DC-10 .
The 747 trijet would have had more payload , range , and passenger capacity than the L-1011 and DC-10 .
The center engine would have been fitted in the tail with an S-duct intake similar to the L-1011 's .
However , engineering studies showed that a total redesign of the 747 wing would be necessary .
Maintaining the same 747 handling characteristics would be important to minimize pilot retraining .
Boeing decided instead to pursue a shortened four-engine 747 , resulting in the 747SP.
Boeing announced the 747 ASB ( "Advanced Short Body " ) in 1986 as a response to the Airbus A340 and the McDonnell Douglas MD-11 .
This aircraft design would have combined the advanced technology used on the 747-400 with the foreshortened 747SP fuselage .
The aircraft was to carry 295 passengers a range of .
However , airlines were not interested in the project and it was cancelled in 1988 in favor of the 777 .
Boeing announced the 747-500X and −600X at the 1996 Farnborough Airshow .
The proposed models would have combined the 747 's fuselage with a new 251 ft ( 77 m ) span wing derived from the 777 .
Other changes included adding more powerful engines and increasing the number of tires from two to four on the nose landing gear and from 16 to 20 on the main landing gear .
The 747-500X concept featured an increased fuselage length of 18 ft ( 5.5 m ) to 250 ft ( 76.2 m ) long , and the aircraft was to carry 462 passengers over a range up to 8,700 nautical miles ( 10,000 mi , 16,100 km ) , with a gross weight of over 1.0 Mlb ( 450 tonnes ) .
The 747-600X concept featured a greater stretch to 279 ft ( 85 m ) with seating for 548 passengers , a range of up to 7,700 nmi (8,900 mi , 14,300 km ) , and a gross weight of 1.2 Mlb ( 540 tonnes ) .
A third study concept , the 747-700X , would have combined the wing of the 747-600X with a widened fuselage , allowing it to carry 650 passengers over the same range as a 747-400 .
The cost of the changes from previous 747 models , in particular the new wing for the 747-500X and −600X , was estimated to be more than US$ 5 billion .
Boeing was not able to attract enough interest to launch the aircraft .
As Airbus progressed with its A3XX study , Boeing in 2000 offered the market a 747 derivative as an alternative .
This was a more modest proposal than the previous −500X and −600X that would retain the 747 's overall wing design and add a segment at the root , increasing the span to .
Power would have been supplied by either the Engine Alliance GP7172 or the Rolls-Royce Trent 600 , which were also proposed for the 767-400ERX .
A new flight deck based on the 777 's would be used .
The 747X aircraft was to carry 430 passengers over ranges of up to 8,700 nmi ( 10,000 mi , 16,100 km ) .
The 747X Stretch would be extended to long , allowing it to carry 500 passengers over ranges of up to 7,800 nmi (9,000 mi , 14,500 km ) .
Both would feature an interior based on the 777 's signature architecture .
Freighter versions of the 747X and 747X Stretch were also studied .
Like its predecessor , the 747X family was unable to garner enough interest to justify production , and it was shelved along with the 767-400ERX in March 2001 , when Boeing announced the Sonic Cruiser concept .
Though the 747X design was less costly than the 747-500X and −600X , it was criticized for not offering a sufficient advance from the existing 747-400 .
The 747X did not make it beyond the drawing board , but the 747-400X being developed concurrently moved into production to become the 747-400ER .
After the end of the 747X program , Boeing continued to study improvements that could be made to the 747 .
The 747-400XQLR ( Quiet Long Range ) was meant to have an increased range of 7,980 nmi (9,200 mi , 14,800 km ) , with improvements to boost efficiency and reduce noise .
Improvements studied included raked wingtips similar to those used on the 767-400ER and a sawtooth engine nacelle for noise reduction .
Although the 747-400XQLR did not move to production , many of its features were used for the 747 Advanced , which has now been launched as the 747-8.
As of September 2010 , the 747 has been involved in 124 accidents or incidents , including 49 hull-loss accidents , resulting in 2,852 fatalities .
The 747 has been in 31 hijackings , which caused 25 fatalities .
Few crashes have been attributed to design flaws of the 747 .
The Tenerife airport disaster resulted from pilot error , air traffic control ( ATC ) error , and communications failure , while the Japan Airlines Flight 123 and China Airlines Flight 611 crashes stemmed from improper aircraft repair .
United Airlines Flight 811 , which suffered an explosive decompression mid-flight on February 24 , 1989 , led the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB ) to issue a recommendation that 747-200 cargo doors similar to those on the Flight 811 aircraft be modified .
Korean Air Lines Flight 007 was shot down by the Soviets in 1983 after it had strayed into Soviet territory , causing U.S. President Ronald Reagan to authorize the then-strictly military global positioning system ( GPS) for civilian use .
Accidents due to design errors included TWA Flight 800 , where a 747-100 exploded in mid-air on July 17 , 1996 , probably due to sparking electricity wires inside the fuel tank ; this finding led the FAA to propose a rule requiring installation of an inerting system in the center fuel tank of most large aircraft that was adopted in July 2008 , after years of research into solutions .
At the time , the new safety system was expected to cost US$ 100,000 to $ 450,000 per aircraft and weigh approximately .
El Al Flight 1862 crashed after the fuse pins of engine number 3 broke off shortly after take-off due to metal fatigue .
Instead of dropping away from the wing , engine # 3 knocked off engine # 4 as well as damaging the wing .
As increasing numbers of " classic " 747-100 and 747-200 series aircraft have been retired , some have found their way into museums or other uses .
The " City of Everett" , the first 747 and prototype , is at the Museum of Flight , Seattle , Washington , USA where it is sometimes leased to Boeing for test purposes .
Other 747s in museums include those at the National Aviation Theme Park Aviodrome , Lelystad , The Netherlands ; the Qantas Founders Outback Museum , Longreach , Queensland , Australia ; Rand Airport , Johannesburg , South Africa ; Technikmuseum Speyer , Speyer , Germany ; Musée de l'Air et de l'Espace , Paris , France ; Tehran Aerospace Exhibition , Tehran , Iran ; Jeongseok Aviation Center , Jeju , South Korea , Evergreen Aviation & Space Museum , McMinnville , Oregon , and the National Air and Space Museum , Washington , D.C.
Upon its retirement from service , the 747 number two in the production line was dismantled and shipped to Hopyeong , Namyangju , Gyeonggi-do , South Korea where it was re-assembled , repainted in a livery similar to that of Air Force One and converted into a restaurant .
Originally flown commercially by Pan Am as N747PA , " Clipper Juan T. Trippe" , and repaired for service following a tailstrike , it stayed with the airline until its bankruptcy .
The restaurant closed by 2009 , and the aircraft was scrapped in 2010 .
A former British Airways 747-200B , G-BDXJ , is parked at the Dunsfold Aerodrome in Surrey , England and has been used as a movie set for productions such as the 2006 James Bond film , " Casino Royale " .
The " Jumbohostel" , using a converted 747-200 , opened at Arlanda Airport , Stockholm on January 15 , 2009 .
The wings of a 747 have been recycled as roofs of a house in Malibu , California .
[[ File :Giant planes comparison .svg|thumb|upright=0.9|Comparison between four of the largest aircraft :
Sources : Boeing 747 specifications , 747 airport planning report , 747-8 airport brochure , Lufthansa 747-8 data
Following its debut , the 747 rapidly achieved iconic status , appearing in numerous film productions such as the " Airport " series of disaster films , " Air Force One " , and " Executive Decision " .
Appearing in over 300 film productions the 747 is one of the most widely depicted civilian aircraft and is considered by many as one of the most iconic in film history .
The aircraft entered the cultural lexicon as the original " Jumbo Jet" , a term coined by the aviation media to describe its size , and was also nicknamed " Queen of the Skies . "
<PAGEBOUNDARY>
